Cash Flow Statement

 

 

 

 

1. Introduction 6. Cash Flow from Operating Activities
2. Meaning of Terminology 7. Cash Flow from Investing Activities
3. Classification of Cash Flow Activities 8. Cash Flow from Financing Activities
4. Special Activities — Exercise
5. Cash Flow Statement

1. Introduction

Profit and loss statement and balance sheet are included in financial accounts. Both the statements
are prepared for predetermined objectives. It's preparation process is also predetermined. These
statements are prepared on mercantile base. Where actual expenses and actual incomes (of respective
year - whether paid in cash or not, whether received in cash or not) are recorded in the profit and
loss statement. Revenue expenses and revenue incomes are disclosed in profit and loss statement.
Equity-liabilities and assets are disclosed in balance sheet.

In brief, profit and loss account which is prepared on mercantile base, shows profitability of the
business. Balance sheet provides information about economic solvency.

Besides, profit and loss statement and balance sheet, cash flow statement is also included as a
component of financial accounts. Amongst all assets of the business, cash is the most liquid asset. Cash
does not given any direct - return, unless it is invested. e.g. you have = 1,00,000 and for one year you
have kept it in locker, this will not give you any return. If this ¥ 1,00,000 is deposited in a bank,
invested in share or debentures or invested in any other opportunity, would generate interest, dividend or
profit. Thus, the investment of cash is very essential creation of reward and earnings.

The sources of cash and application of cash, both the decisions are very important. It is desirable
to procure cash from an appropriate source at the same time it is important to invest cash in appropriate
opportunity. This information is not disclosed by profit and loss statement and balance sheet. There
are different objectives to prepare these statements. What are the sources of cash ? Where cash is
invested ? This information is available from cash flow statement. Therefore the preparation of cash
flow is mandatory for certain business enterprises. So that investors can take their decisions in
appropriate manner.

As per accounting standard 3 disclosure of cash flow statement is mandatory from 1-4-2004
and onwards for certain business enterprises. The disclosure of cash flow statement is mandatory for those
business entities whose equity or debt securities are listed or in the process of being listed on the Indian
and foreign stock exchanges. As per accounting standard 3, these business enterprises have to prepare the

cash flow statements under indirect method.

 

250
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
Under section 2(40) of Companites Act, 2013, the cash flow statement is included in the definition
of financial statements.
2. Meaning of Terminologies

(1) Cash flow : There are two types of cash flows : (a) cash inflow and (b) cash outflow. Here
cash flow means receipt-payment of cash and cash equivalent. A transaction due to which cash or
cash equivalent increases is known as cash inflow. A transaction due to which cash or cash
equivalent decrease is known as cash outflow.

The difference of cash inflow and cash outflow is called as net cash flow. This difference can be

as follows : z
e Cash inflow v 1,00,000
Less : Cash outflow v 85,000
Net cash inflow vw 15,000
e Cash inflow v 85,000
Less : Cash outflow v 1,00,000
Net cash outflow “VY 45,000)

 

(2) Cash : Cash means cash on hand, bank balance.
(3) Cash equivalent : Cash equivalent means,
(i) highly liquid short-term investments
(ii) such investments which can be quickly and with accurate estimated price convertible
into cash
(iii) The investment in which the risk of changes in the price is very rare.
e.g. (i) Government securities (ii) Any securities having above stated features.
(4) Cash flow statement : Three types of activities are disclosed in cash flow statement.
— Operating activities — Investing activities — Financing activities
There can be cash inflow and/or cash outflow in each activity. The opening balance of cash and
cash equivalent is added to cash flows generated through these three activities. At the end whatever
amount would arrive will be closing balance of cash and cash equivalent. Cash flow generated from
these activities can be positive or negative.
3. Classification of Cash Flow Activities :

Profit and Loss Account

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dr Cr
Particulars Amt. (%) Particulars Amt. (%)
Opening stock Operating incomes
Purchase
Purchase expenses will be
Operating expenses in cash Non-operating incomes > deducted
om
. Will be operating
Non-cash operating expenses > | aged to profit
operating
Financial expenses and appropriation] _profit

 

 

 

 

Net profit

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

251
Cash Flow Statement
Balance Sheet

 

 

Equity-Liabilities Amt. (%) Assets Amt. (2)
Shareholders’ funds Financial | Non-current assets — | Investing
sae activities
Non-current liabilities activities
Current liabilities Current assets

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Operating activities

In cash flow statement, activities of specific period are classified into three categories :
(1) Operating activities and cash flow from operating activities

(2) Investing activities and cash flow from investing activities

(3) Financing activities and cash flow from financing activities

Their detailed explanation is as follows :

 

(1) Operating activities and cash flow from operating activities :

Operating activities : Operating activities are activities that emerge from profit and loss
statement. Transactions recorded in profit and loss statments are classified for these activities. In this
context operating expenses related discussion is done in the previous chapter of ratio analysis.
Operating profit is computed as follows :

Definition : "Operating activities means main activities of business to earn income, which are
neither investing activities nor financing activities.

These are those activities on the basis of which main income of the business is created.

The identification of operating activities is determined on the basis of the nature of industry of
a business unit. The identification of operating activities of each business is based on the nature of
business. This discussion is pertaining to main activities of income generation. e.g.

(1) Trading Company : For this kind of company, activities of purchase - sales of goods are main
activities of income generation.

(2) Insurance Company : For this kind of company premium income and payment of claims are
main activities of income generation.

(3) Bank : For this kind of business unit lending of loan and acceptance of deposits are main
activities of income generation.

Generally by dividing forms of company into two categories, clarity can be obtained.

(1) Non-finance companies (2) Finance companies

The cash flow emerging given the operating activities of both the types of companies can be

narrated as under :

 

252
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
Cash Flow from Operating Activities

L
v

For Non-finance Companies

Incomes/Receipts from sale of goods/services
Incomes/Receipts from commission or royalty
Any other income which is not arised

from investing activities

Collection from debtors and bills receivables
Payment for purchase of goods/services
Payment to creditors and for bills payables
Salary, wages or any amount paid to
employees. e.g. Bonus

Sales-distribution expenses

Receipt of income tax refund or payment of

tax on other than investing and financing activities

L

For Finance Companies

e Purchase of securities

e Interest paid on deposits/loan

e Sale of securities

e Interest received on securities

e Interest received on lended loan

e Salary or amount paid to employees
e.g. Bonus

e Receipt of income tax refund or
payment of tax on other than

investing and financing activities

Illustration 1 : Identify operating activities from the following transactions of Meena Company.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) | Salary paid (2) Wages paid
(3) Loan borrowed (4) Debentures redeemed
(5) Received from debtors (6) Paid for bills payables
(7) Sale of machine on cash (8) Brokerage received
(9) Purchase of furniture (10) Interest received on investments
(11) Paid interest on loan (12) Income tax refund
Ans. :
No. Transactions Explanation
(1) | Salary paid Operating activity - Transaction of profit and loss statement
(2) | Wages paid Operating activity - Transaction of profit and loss statement
(3) | Loan borrowed Not operating activity - Transaction of equity and liabilities
(4) | Debentures redeemed Not operating activity - Transaction of equity and liabilities
(5) | Received from debtors Operating activity - Debtors are arised from sales
Sales is operating activity.
(6) | Paid for bills payables Operating activity - Bills payables arised from creditors and
creditors from credit purchase - Purchase is operating activity.
(7) | Sale of machine on cash Not operating activity - Transaction of assets
(8) | Brokerage received Operating activity - Transaction of profit and loss statement

 

 

 

 

 

 

253

Cash Flow Statement
 

(9) | Purchase of furniture Not operating activity - Transaction of assets

 

 

(10) | Interest received on Not operating activity - Investments are assets. Interest arised
investments on it is part of investment. Transaction of assets
(11) | Paid interest on loan Not operating activity - Loan is liability. It's paid interest is

result of liability. Transaction of equity and liabilities

 

(12) | Income tax refund Operating activity - (When no clarification is provided whether

it is refund of financing or investing activity, will be treated as

 

 

 

 

operating activity.)

 

Note : There are certain transactions which are always included in operating activities. e.g.

Salary, wages, bonus to workers, employees welfare expenses etc.

(2) Investing Activities :

  

Investing activities, arise from transactions of assets side of balance sheet. Investing activities
means purchase-sale of long-term investments and other investments. Cash and cash equivalent are not
included. Long-term assets are those assets which are not acquired for sale purpose. They are
used for business activities. Purchase of such assets is treated as cash out flow and sale is treated as
cash inflow. e.g. land-building, machines, furniture and other assets held for the generation of income are
also included in investing activities. The income received due to these investments like interest, dividend or

rent is also included in investing activities.

Cash Inflow and Outflow of Investing Activities

L
L tL

Activities of Cash Inflow Activities of Cash Outflow
e Sale of fixed tangible assets e Purchase of fixed tangible assets
e Sale of fixed intangible assets e Purchase of fixed intangible assets
e Sale of long-term investments e Capitalised expenses
(Investments of non-current assets) e Self constructed assets
e.g. Share, debentures, bonds etc. e Purchase of long-term investments
e Return of long-term lending (Investments of non-current assets)

e.g. Share, debentures, bonds etc.
e Long-term lending
Illustration 2 : From the following transactions of Rita Company identify investing activities. Also
state whether the respective activity is cash inflow or cash outflow :
(1) Purchase of land (2) Sale of machine
(3) Purchase of shares of X co. (4) Sale of debentures of Y co.
(5) Assets constructed in factory (6) Purchase of copy-rights
(

(7) Salary paid 8) Carriage inward paid

 

254
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
Ans. :

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No. Transaction Explanation

(1) Purchase of land Investing activity of cash outflow. Investment in asset is increased.
(2) |Sale of machine Investing activity of cash inflow. Investment is reduced from assets.
(3) |Purchase of shares of X co.| Investing activity of cash outflow. Investment in assets is increased.
(4) |Sale of shares of Y co. Investing activity of cash inflow. Investment is reduced from assets.
(5) |Assets constructed in factory| Investing activity of cash outflow. Investment is increased in assets.
(6) |Purchase of copy-rights Investing activity of cash outflow. Investment is increased in assets.
(7) |Salary paid Not investing activity. (Operating activity of cash outflow.)

(8) |Carriage inward paid Not investing activity. (Operating activity of cash outflow.)

 

Note : There are certain transactions which are always included by investing activities for
purchase of fixed (non-current) asset. (Investment in fixed assets) is not done for resale purpose. Thus
these transactions are always considered as investing activities. e.g. purchase of patent, purchase of
furniture etc. During transaction if cash/bank A/c is debited will be treated as cash inflow and if
cash/bank A/c is credited will be treated as cash outflow.

(3) Financing Activities :

Financing activities, arise from the transactions of equity and liabilities (except those of current
liabilities) side of balance sheet. "Financing activities are such activities due to which size and/or composition
of owners' capital (including preference share capital) and borrowed capital of business get changed."

Financing activities have relation with increase or decrease of equity share capital, preference
share capital, debentures, loan etc. It means that the increase in long-term owners' capital and borrowed
capital shows cash inflow and their reduction shows cash outflow of financing activities.

Cash Inflow and Cash Outflow of Financing Activities

L
L L

Activities of Cash Inflow Activities of Cash Outflow
e Issue of equity share e Buy back of equity shares
e Issue of preference share e Redemption of preference share
e Issue of debentures e Redemption of debentures
e Procurement of loan and creation e Redemption of loan or any other
of long-term liabilities long-term liabilities
e Increase in bank overdraft e Dividend payment on equity share

capital and preference share capital
e Reduction in bank overdraft
e Interest paid on debt
Illustration 3 : From the following transactions of Nayana Company identify financing activities. Also

state whether the respective activity is cash inflow or cash outflow.

 

255
Cash Flow Statement
(1) Redemption of preference share

(3) Payment of dividend
(5) Sale of machine

(7) Commission received
Ans. :

(2) Issue of debentures

(4) Loan borrowed for 3 years from BOB
(6) Wages paid

(8) Interest received on investments

 

No. Transactions

Explanation

 

Redemption of preference share

Financing activity of cash outflow. It reduces capital.

 

Financing activity of cash inflow. It increases liabilities.

 

(1)
(2) |Issue of debentures
(3)

Payment of dividend

Financing activity of cash outflow. Dividend paid in share
capital. Thus it is financing activity.

 

(4) |Loan borrowed for 3 years
from BOB

Financing activity of cash inflow. Liability is increased.

 

Sale of machine

Not financing activity. (Investing activity of cash inflow.)

 

Wages paid

Not financing activity. (Operating activity of cash outflow.)

 

Not financing activity. (Operating activity of cash inflow.)

 

)
)

(7) | Commission received
)

 

 

Interest received on investments.

 

Not financing activity. (Interest received on investments is
investing activity of cash inflow.)

 

 

Note : There are certain transactions which are always included in financing activities. e.g.
Dividend paid on share capital. This transaction is linked with capital, thus considered as financing activity.

4. Special Activities :

(1) Two activities from one transaction : Two types of payments are included in each
instalment of hire purchase - payment towards principal amount and interest amount.
e Payment towards principal e It is investing activity. Value of assets is
(Payment towards cash price) increased. Investing activity of cash outflow.

e Interest payment

e It is return of liability, thus it is a financing
activity. Financing activity of cash outflow.

(2) Cash transaction but no cash inflow - outflow :

Cash deposited with bank

Cash withdrawn from bank

— cash reduced, bank balance increased
— cash increased, bank balance reduced

Cash balance and bank balance are shown at the same place in cash flow statement. It is known
as cash and cash equivalent. This transaction has relation with cash, but does not influence cash and

cash equivalent.

(3) Non-cash transactions and provisions : Many transactions of business are not done in
cash form. Thus during preparation of cash flow these transactions are not considered as cash flow.
e.g. Depreciation charged on tangible assets, amount amortized on intangible assets, issue of equity share
and debenture without cash consideration, conversion of debentures into equity.

Illsutration 4 : Following transactions of Bharati Company classified into operating, investing and

financing activities.
(1) Issue of equity share

(3) Long-term loan from bank

(5) Bank balance

(2) Redemption of preference share
(4) Cash balance
(6) Quickly saleable short-term securities

 

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12

256
 

(7) Short-term bank deposit
(9) Amount received from debtors

(8) Commission received

Payment to creditors

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

)

(11) Sale of machine (12) Purchase of furniture

(13) Manufacturing expenses (14) Commission paid

(15) Income tax paid (16) Purchase of investments (Non-current)

(17) Sales-distribution expenses (18) Factory expenses

(19) Paid for trademark (20) Paid for goodwill

(21) Dividend payment (22) Interest received

(23) Income tax refund (24) Purchase of raw material

(25) Rent received (26) Rent paid
No. Activities Transaction Number
(1) | Operating activity 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 23, 24, 26
(2) | Investing activity 11, 12, 16, 19, 20, 22, 25
(3) | Financing activity 1, 2, 3, 21
(4) | Cash and cash equivalent 4,5, 6,7
No. Transaction Explanation Cash Flow
(1) | Issue of equity share Financing activity Cash inflow
(2) | Redemption of preference share Financing activity Cash outflow
(3) | Long-term loan from bank Financing activity Cash inflow
(4) | Cash balance Non-financing activity Cash equivalent
(5) | Bank balance Non-financing activity Cash equivalent
(6) | Quickly saleable short-term Non-financing activity Cash equivalent

securities
(7) | Short-term bank deposit Non-financing activity Cash equivalent
(8) | Commission received Operating activity Cash inflow
(9) | Amount received from debtors Operating activity Cash inflow
(10) | Payment to creditors Operating activity Cash outflow
(11) | Sale of machine Investing activity Cash inflow
(12)] Purchase of furniture Investing activity Cash outflow
(13) | Manufacturing expenses Operating activity Cash outflow
(14) | Commission paid Operating activity Cash outflow
(15) ] Income tax paid Operating activity Cash outflow
(16) | Purchase of investments (Non-current) | Investing activity Cash outflow
257

 

Cash Flow Statement
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No. Transaction Explanation Cash Flow
(17) | Sales-distribution expenses Operating activity Cash outflow
(18) | Factory expenses Operating activity Cash outflow
(19) | Paid for trademark Investing activity Cash outflow
(20) | Paid for goodwill Investing activity Cash outflow
(21) | Dividend payment Financing activity Cash outflow
(22) | Interest received Investing activity Cash inflow
(23) | Income tax refund Operating activity Cash inflow
(24) | Purchase of raw material Operating activity Cash outflow
(25) | Rent received Investing activity Cash inflow
(26) | Rent paid Operating activity Cash outflow
