Reconstruction of Partnership

 

 

1. Introduction 4. Distribution of Reserves and

2. The Changes in Profit and Loss Sharing Accumulated Profits among the
or Distributing Ratio Between Continuing Partners
(Present) Partners 5. Goodwill

3. Revaluation of Assets and Liabilities of a — Exercise
Partnership Firm and its Accounting Effects

 

 

1. Introduction

We have studied about the nature of a partnership firm and its final accounts in the previous chapter.
In this chapter we will study about the "Reconstruction (Reconstitution) of partnership". ie. Changes in
partnership due to several reasons.

Reasons for changes in partnership : Following are three reasons for the changes in a partnership.

Reasons for changes in a partnership

|
J J J

The change in the ratio of Admission of Retirement or death
profit and loss sharing existing of a partner of an
between the continuing partners partnership firm existing partnership firm

In this chapter, we will discuss in detail about the change in profit and loss sharing ratio or
distribution ratio between the existing partners. The detailed discussion on the admission of a new partner
and the retirement or death of a partner has been made in the next chapter.

2. The Changes in Profit and Loss Sharing or Distributing Ratio Between the Continuing

(Present) Partners

Generally, profit and loss sharing ratio between the partners in a partnership is not changed once it
is agreed. e.g. profit and loss sharing ratio between A and B is 3:2. Generally this ratio is not changed.
But if it is required, then it can be changed with the consent of all existing partners.

There may be following reasons for the change in profit and loss distribution ratio :

(1) When a partner in charge of the firm is not able to manage the firm on the grounds of

illness or incapability or some personal reasons.

(2) When a partner can not devote enough time to run a business, the other partner has to

substitute him and run the business.

(3) Due to retirement or death of a partner.

(4) Due to new partners' admission.
Explanation or Understanding with Illustration : Let us understand the above information

(particulars) with an illustration.

 

107
Reconstruction of Partnership
Virat and Vaman are the partners in a firm sharing profit and loss in proportion of 1:1. Due to his
illness, Vaman is not able to spare enough time for business. Therefore, they have decided to share
the profit and loss in the ratio of 2:1.

After making changes in the profit and loss sharing ratio Virat will get 2 part of the profit and
Vaman will get 4.

Prior to the above distribution, both used to get 4 part of profit. From this we can say that
the portion of share of profit for Virat is increased and that of Vaman is decreased. The same can be
shown by the following calculation :

Changes in profit share = Old share — New share

In the above formula if the answer is ‘+’ (positive) then it is called decrease in profit (sacrifice)
sharing and if the answer is ‘—’ (negative) then it is called increase in profit sharing (gain).
Changes in profit received by Virat = Old share — New share

=1i_2
~ 2 3
_ 3-4
6
-—t
~ 6
Increase in profit ratio received by Virat = + (Gain)(As per above explanation)

Changes in profit received by Vaman = Old share — New share

woe
we

aH
2

Decrease in profit ratio received by Vaman = 4 (Sacrifice)(As per above explanation)

From the above calculation, it can be seen that the share of profit of Virat is increased by 4 and
Vaman lost the share of profit by 3. ie. 4 share of profit, which is lost by Vaman, is gained by Virat.
In this way, the increase in the share of profit of Virat is called 'gain' and decrease in the share of profit
of Vaman is called 'sacrifice'. In this example Vaman's 'sacrifice' turns out to be 'gain' for Virat.

Generally, when there is a change in profit sharing ratio of the existing partner, then some partners
have to sacrifice certain portion of their profit which will be the gain for the other partner. So at the
time of the reconstruction of a partnership, two important points are to be noted :

(1) Sacrificing ratio (2) Gaining ratio

(1) Sacrificing Ratio :

When there is a change in the ratio of profit and loss sharing of existing partners, a portion of profit
of certain partners is reduced. i.e. they get less share as compared to what they used to get before.
This reduced share of profit of a partners is called "Sacrificing ratio".

In case of admission of a new partner in an existing partnership firm, old partners have to give
certain share of profit in favour of the new partner. At that time, it is also required to calculate sacrificing

108

 

Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
ratio of old partners. The detailed discussion of admission of a new partner will be made in
Chapter no. 5.

Sacrificing ratio depends on the changes in the old profit and loss sharing ratio of the parnters. In
the existing partnership firm, sacrificing ratio is a difference between the old share and the new share of
profit of one or more partners who have, sacrificed. As per the mathematical method,

Sacrificing ratio of a partner = Old share — New share

From the above formula we can say that if a partners’ old share of profit is higher than the new
share, it means that the partner has sacrified his share. Let us try to understand the sacrifice made
by a partner through the following example.

e When sacrifice is done by one partner :
Illustration 1 : Ram, Shyam and Ghanshyam are the partners in a firm sharing profit and loss equally.

They decided to share profit and loss in the ratio of 3:2:1 in future. In these circumstances,

calculate which partner has sacrified and how much ?

 

 

Ans, :
Ram Shyam Ghanshyam Total
Old ratio 1 1 : 1 3
Old share 4 < <
New ratio 3 2 1 6
New share 3 2 4

 

Now let's calculate sacrifice ratio by partners.

Sacrifice by partner = Old share — New share

i -1_2
(1) Ram's sacrifice = 3 ;
2

Ram's sacrifice = z (Gain)

Here, 2 share in sacrifice formula, it means Ram is gaining 4 shares.

ale

(2) Shyam's sacrifice =

yok

-2
6

o

6

Shyam's sacrifice = 0 (No gain, no sacrifice)
From the above calculation sacrifice ratio of Shyam = 0. i.e. Shyam has sacrificed nothing,
as his share of profit remains the same.

Old ratio = $

io - 2-14
New ratio = € = 3

 

109
Reconstruction of Partnership
(3) Ghanshyam's sacrifice = 4
2

 

6
Ghanshyam's sacrifice = ¢ (Sacrifice)

From the above illustration, the benefit to Ram of 4 share is due to the sacrifice given by
Ghanshyam of 4 share.

From the above illustration we can say that while calculating the sacrificing ratio, if the answer is

negative (—), then it is benefit to the partner and not sacrifice. ie. Gain ratio = New profit sharing
ratio — Old profit sharing ratio
Ram Shyam Ghanshyam

0

al
ab
°

(Gain) (Sacrifice)
Note : Total of sacrifice share and total of gain share is always equal.

e When more than one partner is sacrificing :

Illustration 2 : Bhavesh, Vipul and Hiral are the partners in a firm sharing profit and loss in the ratio
of 2:2:1. They decided to share profits and losses in the ratio of 3:2:1 in future. From this

information, calculate the sacrificing ratio.

 

 

Ans. :
Bhavesh Vipul Hiral Total
Old ratio 2 : 2 : 1 5
2 2 1
Old share $ = 5
New ratio 3 2 1 6
3 2 1
New share s $ S

 

Share of sacrifice = Old share — New share

 

(1) Bhavesh's sacrifice = 2 - 3
_ 12-15
~~ 30
-3
30

Bhavesh's sacrifice = i (Gain)

(2) Vipul's sacrifice $7 2

12-10
30

 

Vipul's sacrifice + (Sacrifice)

 

110
Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
(3) Hiral's sacrifice =

Hiral's sacrifice = + (Sacrifice)
From the above calculation it can be seen that the sacrifice by Vipul and Hiral is received
by Bhavesh in the form of gain/ benefit. Vipul sacrificed 4 and Hiral sacrificed +. So sacrifice

ratio between Vipul and Hiral is 2 4 respectively. i.e. sacrificing ratio of Vipul and Bhavesh

30° 3
is 2:1.

As per the earlier discussion, some partners’ sacrifice turns out to be a benefit for the other
partners’. In the above illustration sacrifice by Vipul and Hiral become a gain for Bhavesh. The

calculation is as under :

wy + _~2
Vipul's sacrifice = 35

oy . L
Hiral's sacrifice = 35

i iral': ifice = & ++
Vipul and Hiral's total sacrifice = 30 + 30

2+1
30

3
30

Vipul and Hiral's total sacrifice = o

's gain =
Bhavesh's gain = 10

So, from the above calculation, it can be seen that the benefit of + received by Bhavesh,
is in the ratio of 2:1 from Vipul and Hiral respectively.
e Sacrifice by one partner and gain by more than one partners :

Illustration 3 : Poonam, Dhaval and Komal are the partners in a firm. Their profit and loss sharing

ratio is 3:2:1. All the partners have decided to change the profit and loss ratio and it is 1:2:2.

Calculate the sacrificing ratio of partners.

 

 

 

Ans. :
Poonam Dhaval Komal Total

Old ratio 3 3 2 : 1 6

3 2 1
Old share s $ S
New ratio 1 2 2 5

4 2 2
New share 5 5 5

111

 

Reconstruction of Partnership
The calculation of sacrifice by the partner :
Sacrifice = Old share — New share

(1) Poonam's sacrifice = Old share — New share

3-1
6° 5

Poonam's sacrifice = =

(2) Dhaval's sacrifice = Old share — New share

22
6 5

10-12
30

Dhaval's sacrifice = > (Gain)

(3) Komal's sacrifice = Old share — New share
=i_2
~ 6 5
_ 5-12
~ 30
Komal's sacrifice = =z (Gain)

As per the above calculation answers of Dhaval and Komal are negative (—). ie. Dhaval and

Komal have sacrificied nothing, but they received benefit of 4 and S.
The benefit by Dhaval and Komal is due to Poonam's sacrifice. The calculation is as under :
Poonam's sacrifice = 2
Dhaval's gain = 4
Komal's gain = t
Dhaval and Komal's gain = =>

Here, the sacrifice of 3 by Poonam, is equal to the total benefit of Dhaval and Komal.

Dhaval and Komal received the benefit of + and + respectively. i.e. the gain ratio between
Dhaval and Komal is 2:7 which is received from Pooman.

Now, we try to understand the calculation of the gain ratio.

 

112
Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
(2) Gaining Ratio :

When there is a change in profit and loss sharing ratio of partners, share of profit of some
partners reduces and other partners share of profit increases. So some partners’ share of profit is
higher than the prior one. The higher share of profit of partners is called 'gaining ratio’.

If any partner retired or if there is death of any partner in the existing firm, share of profit of the
retired or deceased partner will be received by the existing partners. At that time also, it becomes
necessary to calculate the gaining ratio. The detailed discussion of retirement or death of an existing
partner will be made in chapter 6.

If the new profit-loss sharing ratio is more compared to the old profit-loss sharing ratio then it is
called gain. Gaining ratio is a difference between new profit-loss sharing ratio and old profit-loss sharing
ratio received by the partners. As per the mathematical method,

Gain = New share — Old share
Let us try to understand the gaining ratio of partners with an illustration.

e When any one partner is gaining :

Illustration 4 : Dhruvil, Gopi and Mukund are partners the in a partnership firm. Their profit and loss

 

sharing ratio is 1:1:1. All partners have decided to change the profit and loss sharing ratio in future

to 1:2:3. Calculate the gain ratio.

 

 

Ans. :
Dhuvil Gopi Mukund Total
Old ratio 1 1 1 3
Old share 4 4 4
New ratio 1 2 3 6
New share 4 2 3

 

Now, let's calculate the gaining ratio of the partners.

Partner's gain = New share — Old share

(1) Dhruvil's gain

Dhruvil's gain =

(2) Gopi's gain

 

Gopi's gain) =

113

 

Reconstruction of Partnership
ale
I

(3) Mukund's gain =

oy

3-2
6

4

6

Mukund's gain =

As per the above calculation of gain, Dhruvil's gain answer is negative (—) which shows that
actually Dhruvil does not receive any benefit but he has to sacrifice his share because of the
change in profit and loss sharing ratio. Gopi has neither sacrificed nor gained due to the change in profit
and loss sharing ratio as there is no change in her profit and loss sharing ratio. Her new profit-loss
sharing ratio 2 = 4 and her old ratio is also i. Actually, gain by Mukund is due to Dhruvil's
sacrifice.

From the above illustration, it can be seen that while calculating the gain ratio if the answer is

negative (—) then it is a sacrifice and not a gain.
e When more than one partner are gaining :

Illustration 5 : Dhyey, Siddhi and Prapti are the partners in a firm sharing profits and losses in the
ratio of 1:1:1. All partners have decided to share profit and loss in the new ratio of 1:3:3. From

the above information, find out the gain ratio.

 

 

Ans, :
Dhyey Siddhi Prapti Total
Old ratio 1 : 1 : 1 3
Old share 4 4 4
New ratio 1 3 3 7
New share + 3 3

 

Gain = New share — Old share

(1) Gain to Dhyey =

al
l

Gain to Dhyey = + (Sacrifice)

(2) Gain to Siddhi = 2 — 4
_ 9-7
~ 2T
Gain to Siddhi = 2

 

114
Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
I
ahe
I

(3) Gain to Prapti =

Gain to Prapti = =
As per the above calculation, while calculating the gain to Dhyey, answer is negative (—), so
Dhyey is not gaining anything but he has sacrificed + share of profit. Gain to Siddhi and Prapti is +
and + respectively.
So, gain ratio between Siddhi and Prapti is + : + ie. 1:1 (2:2).
e ‘When more than one partner scrifices and gain is to any one partner :

Illustration 6 : Sagar, Sarita and Palak are the partners in a firm sharing profits and losses in the
ratio of 3:3:2. All partners have decided to change their profit and loss ratio to 1:1:1. Calculate

gain and sacrifice by the partners.

 

 

Ans. :
Sagar Sarita Palak Total
Old ratio 3 : 3 : 2 8
3 3 2
Old share 3 3 2
New ratio 1 : 1 : 1 3
4 1 1
New share 3 3 3

 

(1) Explanation with gain formula :
Gain = New share — Old share

(1) Gain to Sagar =

Gain to Sagar = 3 (Sacrifice)

(2) Gain to Sarita =

eo ok
l
cole

|
S

Gain to Sarita = 3 (Sacrifice)

i =1_2
(3) Gain to Palak = 3 3
_ 8-6
~ 24
Gain to Palak = +

 

115
Reconstruction of Partnership
As per the above calculation, Sagar and Sarita have sacrificed + and x respectively and Palak

received the gain of =.

Gain to Palak

ee

+

Gain to Palak

eh yl

Sacrifice by Sagar + Sacrifice by Sarita

(2) Explanation with sacrifice formula :

(1) Sagar's sacrifice

Sagar's sacrifice

(2) Sarita's sacrifice

Sarita's sacrifice

(3) Palak's sacrifice

Palak's sacrifice

Sacrifice = Old share — New share

3-1
8 3
9-8

24

a

24
3-1
8 3
9-8

24

a

24
2-1
8 3
6-8

24

2 .
ut (Gain)

As per the above calculation, Sagar and Sarita have sacrificed and the benefit is received by

Palak.

Gain to Palak = Sagar's sacrifice + Sarita's sacrifice

p
RF

+

eh yl

Gain to Palak

1

24

As per the above calculation we can say that the answer will remain same both in gain formula
and sacrifice formula. In this way, whenever there is a change in profit and loss sharing ratio between

the existing partners necessary calculation can be made by sacrifice or gain formula.

In short, whenever calculation is made by gain formula and if the answer is positive (+) then it

is a gain and if the answer is negative (—) then it is a sacrifice.

Whenever calculation is made by the sacrifice formula and if the answer is positive (+) then it

is a sacrifice and if the answer is negative (—) then it is a gain.

 

116

Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
Difference Between Sacrifice Ratio and Gaining Ratio :

 

Sacrifice Ratio

Gaining Ratio

 

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

Meaning : Old partners giving their profit
share in favour of the new partners, OR
changes in existing partners’ profit-loss ratio
due to the reconstruction of a partnership firm
where any partners gives its profit share in

favour of other partners is called sacrifice.

When is it computed ? : At the time of
admission of new partner and reconstruction
of partnership firm, sacrifice ratio of old
partners is computed.

Formula : Sacrifice = Old share — New share

Why is it found ? Sacrifice ratio is found to
distribute the goodwill which is broughts in

a new partner for his share and to give

by adjustments of goodwill at the time of the
reconstruction of a partnership firm.

(1) Share of retiring partners received by
existing partners, OR changes in existing
partners’ profit-loss sharing ratio, where
some partner's sacrifice is received by
existing partners is called gain ratio.

(3) At the time of the retirement of a partner
and at the time of the reconstruction of
partnership, gaining ratio of existing

partners is found.

Gain = New share — Old share

(4) Gaining ratio is found for the share of
goodwill to the retiring partner by the
existing partners in their gain ratio and
to give adjustment of goodwill due to the

reconstruction of a partnership firm.

 

 

Now let us discuss another important point regarding the reconstruction of partnership.

3. Revaluation Accounts of Assets and Liabilities of a Partnership Firm and its Accounting

Effects

The book value of assets and liabilities recorded in the books of a partnership firm when brought
at present value it is called revaluation of assets. It means, recorded assets and liabilities are shown
at new value which is called revaluation of assets and liabilities. Recorded assets and liabilities may be
higher or lesser than its actual or real value. It may be possible that, with the passage of time, the
price of fixed assets such as land and building may go up. In the same manner, there may not be any
provision for reserve on debtors or bills receivable. In the same manner, it may be possible that liabilities
increase or decrease or the liabilities remain unrecorded. Due to all these reasons if the partners have

decided to revalue the assets and liabilities of the firm then its accounting effects are given.

e Accounting effects of revaluation of assets and liabilities of a partnership firm :

A special account is opened in the books of a partnership firm to record the accounting effects of
the revaluation of assets and liabilities. This account is called the ‘Revaluation Account’. Generally,
whenever there is reconstruction of a partnership firm (changes in profit and loss sharing ratio), assets
and liabilities of the firm are revalued. So assets and liabilities can be recorded at their real value in
the firm's accounts and there is no possibility that any partner has to suffer because of the reconstruction
of a partnership. For the same reasons, at the time of admission of a new partner in the existing
partnership firm or at the time of retirement or death of a partner of the existing firm, assets and
liabilities are revalued.

 

117
Reconstruction of Partnership
At the time of giving the accounting effect of revaluation, following rules should be remembered.

(1) If there is increase in assets-receivable then it is called profit.

(2) If there is decrease in assets-receivable then it is called loss.

(3) _ If there is increase in liabilities-provisions then it is called loss.

(4) _ If there is decrease in liabilities-provisions then it is called profit.

(5) If unrecorded assets are brought to books then it is a profit.

(6) If unrecorded liabilities are brought to books then it is a loss.

In above circumstances, when profit arise then respective account is debited and revaluation
account is credited and when loss arise then the revaluation account is debited and the respective
account is credited.

Balance of assets is always debit. Therefore, if assets value increases then assets account will be
debited and revaluation account will be credited as it is a profit. On the contrary, if assets value
decreases then revaluation account will be debited and assets account will be credited.

Balance of liabilities is always credit. Therefore if the liabilities value increases then the
realisation account will be debited and the liabilities account will be credited, as it is a loss. On the
contrary if the liabilities value decreases then the liabilities account will be debited and revaluation
account will be credited.

Effect of changes (effect of adjustments) in the value of assets and liabilities are given in
the revaluation account. So, it is also known, as profit and loss adjustment account.

At the time of revaluation of assets and liabilities, following journal entries are passed in the
books of firm.

Journal Entry
