Final Accounts (Financial Statements) of
Partnership Firm

 

 

 

 

1. Introduction 4. Adjustments of Final Accounts of a
2. Objectives of the Final Accounts of Partnership Firm
Partnership 5. _ Illustrations
3. Final Accounts of Partnership Firm — Exercise
1. Introduction

Similar to the sole proprietor, the partnership firms also prepare its final accounts from the trial
balance with the consideration of the adjustments at the end of the year to know the earned profit or
incurred losses as well as the financial status of the business.

In the final accounts of a partnership firm, trading account, profit and loss account, profit and loss
appropriation account, partners’ capital accounts/current accounts and balance sheets are prepared.

2. Objectives of Final Accounts of Partnership Firm

(1) To ascertain gross profit or loss : A partnership firm can ascertain gross profit or loss
through the preparation of trading account.

(2) To ascertain net profit or loss : A partnership firm can ascertain net profit or loss
through the preparation of profit and loss account. The profitability of the firm can be seen from the
profit and loss account.

(3) To ascertain divisible profit or loss : All personal transactions and provisions of the
partners with the firm can be ascertained through the preparation of profit and loss appropriation account.

(4) To know financial status of the firm : To know the financial status of the firm balance
sheet is prepared. It provides information about assets, receivables, payables and capital of the firm.

(5) For taxation purpose : To know the taxable income of the firm final accounts are prepared.
3. Final Accounts of Partnership Firm :

Annual financial statements of the firm are prepared as follows with the consideration of balances
recorded in the trial balance at the end of the accounting year and adjustments.

(1) Trading Account : Transactions pertaining to receipt and issue of goods, purchase of goods
and production related expenses are recorded in the trading account. To ascertain gross profit or loss on
the basis of these transactions account which is prepared is known as the trading account.

At the debit side of the trading account opening stock, purchase minus purchase return, as well as
outward of goods due to other reason like withdrawal of goods, goods destroyed by fire, goods distributed
as sample, goods given for donation are recorded. Purchase expenses like wages, carriage inward,
frieght and production expenses like factory expenses, rent, taxes, electricity, fuel, coal, gas, royalty,
depreciation on plant etc are also disclosed.

At the credit side of trading account sales minus sales return, sale of scrap and closing stock of
goods are disclosed.

 

34
Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
When trading account is closed and if total of credit side of trading account is more than debit
side, difference is shown at debit side which is considered as gross profit. This gross profit is
transferred to the credit side of profit and loss account. If total of debit side is more than credit side,
difference is shown at credit side which is considered as gross loss. This gross loss is transferred to debit
side of profit and loss account.

Specimen of Trading Account
Trading for the period ending on ......... OF cesesecseseees
Dr Cr

Particular Ant. (%) Particular Amt. (%)

 

 

To Opening stock v By Sales v

To Purchase Less : Sales return v

 

By Sale of scrap A/c
ov By Closing stock
By Profit and loss A/c (Gross loss)

Less : Purchase return
Less : Outward of goods
To Purchase expenses :

QNN
QSNNN

 

Wages

Carriage inward
Railway Freight
Transportation cartage
Port charge

Demurrage

Wharfaje

To Production expenses :

NNNNNNN

N

Production wages

Royalty

Factory expense (rent, taxes, electricity,
fuel, coal, gas)

\

Consumable stores (oil, grease)
To Factory depreciation A/c

To Plant-machinery depreciation A/c

QSNN NN

To Profit and loss (gross profit)

 

 

v v

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) Profit and Loss Account : To ascertain net profit or loss, profit and loss account is
prepared. At the debit of profit and loss account, gross loss transferred from trading account,
administrative, expenses, sales-distribution expenses, financial expenses, depreciation on assets, sundry
expenses and other losses of the firm are shown. While at the credit side, gross profit transferred from
the trading account, incomes of business like interest received, rent received, commission received,
dividend, brokerage, bad debts return, profit on sale of asset and other incomes are shown.

When profit and loss account is closed and if the total of credit side is more than the debit side,
difference is shown at the debit side which is considered as the net profit. This net profit is transferred at
the credit side of the profit and loss appropriation account. When the total of debit side is more than
the credit side, difference is shown at the credit side, which is considered as the net loss. This net loss is
transferred to the debit side of the profit and loss appropriation account.

35

 

Final Accounts of Partnership Firm
Specimen of Profit and Loss Account

Profit and Loss Account for the Period Ending on ..

 

 

Particular

Amt. (2)

Particular

 

To Trading A/c (Gross loss)

To Administrative expenses :

Trading expenses

Salary, allowances, bonus

Rent

Insurance Premium

Taxes

Postage

Printing and Stationery

Legal charges

Audit fees

Electricity expense

Contribution to provident fund

To Sales-Distribution Expense :

Carriage outward

Salesman salary - commission

Advertisement expenses

Discount allowed

Discount reserve

Expenses of show-room

Godown expense

Packing expense

To Financial Expenses :

Interest on partners’ loan

Interest on bank overdraft

Interest on borrowed loan

Bank charges commission

Manager commission

To Other Expenses-Loss :

Donation expense

office-Assets depreciation
Bad debts (TB) v

+ Bad debts (Adj.) v

+ Bad debts reserve (Adj.) v

v

Less : Bad debts reserve (TB) v

Loss due to fire

Loss due to theft

Loss on sale of asset

Provision for expense/loss

To Profit and loss appropriation A/c

v

NQLQNNNNNNNNS

QVQNNNNNNS

QSQNNN

NN

QSQNNNNN

 

 

 

(Net profit)

N

 

 

By Trading A/c (Gross profit)
By Incomes :

Discount received

Rent received

Commission received

Brokerage received

Consignment commission received
Interest on investment

Interest on loan lent

Bad debts return

Profit on sale of asset

Sale of old newspapers

Income from scrap

Sundry income

By Profit and loss appropriation A/c
(Net loss)

NQNNNNLNNNLLRNNRN SS

 

 

 

 

 

 

Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12

36
(3) Profit and Loss Appropriation Account : To disclose the distribution of profit & Loss between the
partners, profit and loss appropriation account is prepared in a partnership firm. Profit and loss appropriation
account is a part of profit and loss account only. The separate preparation of it is not mandatory.

At the debit side of the profit and loss appropriation account, net loss transferred from profit and
loss account, interest on partners' capital, interest on credit balance of current accounts, bonus,
commission, salary and remuneration to partners' amount transferred to general reserve account are
shown.

At the credit of profit and loss appropriation account, net profit transferred from profit and loss
account, interest on drawings of partners, interest on debit balance of current accounts etc. are shown.

When profit and loss appropriation account is closed and if the total of credit side of it is more
than the debit side, the difference is recorded at the debit side and it is considered as the divisible profit.
This divisible profit is credited to partners' capital accounts or to partners current accounts when fixed
capital account is maintained, in their profit-loss sharing ratio.

While total of debit side is more than difference is recorded at the credit side, which is considered
as the divisible loss. This divisible loss is debited to partners' capital accounts or current account in their
profit-loss sharing ratio.

Note : When separate profit and loss appropriation account is not prepared, to ascertain divisible
profit or loss, all items of profit and loss appropriation account are shown in profit and loss account.
This divisible profit or loss is transferred to partners' capital accounts. This is explained as a optional
treatment. Not to be asked in examination.

Specimen of Profit and Loss Appropriation Account

 

Profit and Loss Appropriation Account for the year ending on

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dr Cr
Particular Ant. (%) Particular Amt. (%)
To Net loss (From profit and loss A/c) ov By Net profit(From profit and loss A/c) ov
To Interest on partners’ capital A/c To Interest on partners' drawings A/c
A v A v
B v v B v v
To Interest on credit balance of By Interest on debit balance of current
current account of partner A/c v account of partner A/c v
To Salary, bonus, commission, By Partners’ capital or current A/c
remuneration to partner A/c ov (Divisible loss)
To General reserve A/c v A v
To Partners’ capital or current A/c B v v
(Divisible profit)
A v
B v
v
37

Final Accounts of Partnership Firm
(4) Partners’ Capital Accounts : Partners of a partnership firm undertake personal transactions
with the firm. To record such transactions capital account of each partner is prepared in the books of
the firm. Transactions which increase the capital of partner are recorded at the credit side and
transactions which reduce the capital of partner are recorded at the debit side of the capital account.

First of all the opening capital of a partner is written at the credit side of the capital account and
subsequently if additional capital introduced it also credited.. At debit side, capital returned to the partner
is recorded. When partners capital accounts are closed the total of credit side generally remains more,
thus difference is written at the debit side. This is known as the closing balance. This balance is shown
at the capital-liability side as a permanent capital.

Specimen of Partners' Capital Accounts :

Partners' Capital Accounts

 

 

 

Dr Cr
Date Particular A B Date Particular A B
Amt. (%)|Amt. (=) Amt. (%)| Amt. (@)
— | To Cash/bank/other 14 | By Balance b/d
asset A/c (With- (Opening capital) v v
drawal of capital) v ov — | By Cash/bank/other
31-3 | To Balance c/d asset A/c
(Closing credit (Additional capital) v v
balance) v v
v v v v

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) Partners' Current Accounts : There are personal transactions between partners and
partnership firm other than the permanent capital. To record these transactions, accounts which are
prepared are known as partners’ current accounts.

At the credit side of partners' current accounts, opening credit balance of current account, interest
on capital, interest on credit balance of current accounts, salary, bonus, commission and bonus to
partners’, share in divisible profit etc are recorded. On the debit side of the current account, opening
debit balance of current account (if any), drawings, interest on drawings, interest on debit balance of
current accounts, share in divisible loss etc are recorded.

When current account is closed and if the total of credit side is more than the debit side,
difference is shown at the debit side. This is known as the closing balance. This balance is shown at the
the Capital-liability side of the balance sheet. If the total of debit side is more, difference is shown at
credit side. This is also known as the closing balance. But this balance is shown at Asset side of the
balance sheet.

 

38
Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
Specimen of Partners' Current Accounts :

Partners' Current Accounts

 

 

 

Dr Cr
Date Particular A B Date Particular A B
Amt. (%)|Amt. (%) Amt. (%)| Amt. (=)
14 | To Balance b/d 1-4 | By Balance b/d
(Opening debit (Opening credit
balance of current v v balance) v v
Alc) 31-3 | By Interest on
— | To Drawings A/c v v capital A/c v v
31-3 | To Interest on 31-3 | By Interest on credit
drawings A/c v ov balance of current
31-3 | To Interest on debit Alc - v
balance of current A/c| v - 31-3 | By Salary, bonus,
31-3 | To Divisible loss v v commission, v ov
31-3 | To Balance c/d remuneration A/c
(Closing credit 31-3 | By Divisible profit v v
balance) v ov 31-3 | By Balance c/d
(Closing debit
balance) v v
v v v v

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Note : All items of the current accounts will be shown in the capital accounts when current
accounts are not given in a question.

(6) Balance Sheet : To know the financial status of the firm balance sheet is prepared at the
end of an accounting year. Balance sheet is a statement. Where on one side of it, amount of capital and
liabilities and on another side amount of assets are disclosed.

At capital and liability side of balance sheet of the partnership firm the balance of permanent capital
accounts, credit balances of current accounts, creditors, bills payable, bank overdraft, expenses
outstanding, incomes received in advance, loan borrowed, partners' loan, interest outstanding on partners’
loan are disclosed. Besides, general reserve and other reserves etc are also disclosed.

At the asset side of the balance sheet fixed assets, investments, current and liquid assets like closing
stock, debtors, cash balance, bank balance, bills receivables, incomes due but not received, prepaid

expenses, loan lent, deffered revenue expenses, debit balance of current accounts etc are disclosed.

 

39
Final Accounts of Partnership Firm
Specimen Balance Sheet :

Balance Sheet as at ...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Capital-Liabilities Amt. (%) Assets Amt. (%)

Fixed Capital Accounts : Non-Current Assets :

A v Fixed Assets :
B v Tangible Assets :

Current Accounts (Credit Balance) : Land v
A v Building v
B ov Leasehold properties ov

Reserves : Vehicles v
General reserve v Machines v
Capital reserve ov Furniture and Fittings ov
Other reserve v Intangible Assets :

Non-Current Liabilities : Patent v
Loan from bank v Trademark v
Loan from financial institutions ov Copyright ov
Loan from friends v Goodwill v
Partners’ loan v Investments :

Current Liabilities : Investments in government
Bank overdraft v securities v
Sundry creditors v Investments of providend fund v
Bills payable ov Other Non-Current Assets :

Expenses outstanding v Deffered revenue expense v
Income received in advance v Current Assets :
Taxation provision v Closing stock v
Provident fund ov Sundry debtors v
Interes outstanding on Cash balance v
on partners! loan v Bank balance v
Incomes due v
Loan lent v
Bills receivable v
Prepaid expenses ov
Current Accounts :
(In case of debit balance)
A v
B v
v v

 

 

 

Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12

40

 
4.

Adjustments of Final Accounts of Partnership Firm

At the end of an accounting year, to give complete shape to accounts, adjustments and adjustment
entries are recorded. Adjustment entries and their accounting effect in an annual account of a firm is

 

 

as under :
Adjustments, Adjustment Entries and their Effect in Annual Accounts
No. Adjustment Adjustment Entry Effect in Annual Accounts
(1) | Closing stock Closing stock A/c ...Dr (1) Asset side of balance sheet

To trading A/c

(2)

Credit side of trading A/c

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

on debtors

 

 

To discount reserve on

debtors A/c

 

(2) | Outstanding expense} Respective expense A/c ...Dr (1) Debit side of trading /P & L
To outstanding expense A/c A/c add it to respective expense
(2) Capital & liability side of
balance sheet
(3) | Prepaid expense Prepaid expense A/c ...Dr (1) Asset side of balance sheet
To respective expense A/c (2) Debit side of trading/P & L
A/c deduct it from respective
expense
(4) | Receivable income | Receivable income A/c ...Dr (1) Credit side of P & L A/c add
To respective income A/c it to respective income
(2) Assets side of balance sheet
(5) | Income received in | Respective income A/c ...Dr (1) Liability side of balance sheet
advance To income received in (2) Credit side of P & L A/c
advance A/c deduct from respective income
(6) | Depreciation on Depreciation A/c ...Dr (1) Debit side of P & L A/c
assets To respective asset A/c (2) Asset side of balance sheet,
deduct from respective asset
(7) | Bad debts written | Bad debts A/c ...Dr (1) Debit side of P & L A/c, add
off (new/additional) To debtors A/c it old bad debts
(2) Asset side of balance sheet,
deduct from debtors
(8) | Bad debts reserve | Profit and loss A/c ...Dr (1) Debit side of P & L Alc
To bad debts reserve A/c (2) Asset side of balance sheet
deduct from debtors
(9) | Discount reserve Profit and loss A/c ...Dr (1) Debit side of P & L A/c

(2)

Asset side of balance sheet

deduct from debtors

 

 

 

41

Final Accounts of Partnership Firm
 

Adjustment

Adjustment Entry

Effect in Annual Accounts

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

recorded to

purchase book

 

To purchase A/c

(2) Sales return A/c ...Dr
To debtors A/c

 

 

(10) | For unrecorded Purchase A/c ...Dr (1) Debit side of trading A/c add
credit purchase To creditors A/c it to purchase
(2) Liability side of balance sheet
add it to creditors
(11) | For unrecorded Debtors A/c ...Dr (1) Asset side of balance sheet
credit sales To sales A/c add it to debtors
(2) Credit side of trading A/c
add it to sales
(12) | For unrecorded To creditors A/c ...Dr (1) Liability side of balance sheet,
credit purchase To purchase return A/c deduct it from creditors
return (2) Debit side of trading A/c,
deduct it from purchase
(13) | For unrecorded Sales return A/c ...Dr (1) Credit side of trading A/c,
credit sales To debtors A/c deduct it from sales
return (2) Asset side of balance sheet,
deduct it from debtors
(14) | Purchase return (1) Sales A/c ...Dr (1) Credit side of trading A/c,
recorded to sales To debtors A/c deduct it from sales
book (2) Asset side of balance sheet
deduct it from debtors
(2) Creditors A/c ...Dr (3) Liability side of balance sheet
