Accounting for Share Capital
As per the Indian Companies Act, 2013, there are two main types of companies : Private
Company and Public Company.

Private Company : A private company is one which by its Articles of Association (i) restricts the
right to transfer its shares; (ii) limits the number of its members to 200; (iii) prohibits any invitations to
the public to subscribe for any securities ie. shares or debentures of the company (iv) must have
at least 2 members.

The name of a private company ends with the words, 'Private Limited’. e.g. Panchvilla Cotton
Private Limited, Apex Hydro Private Limited.

As per new Companies Act one person can form a company, under the necessary legal
provisions any one person can form a One Person Company — OPC which has only one member. It is a
company incorporated as a private company.

Public Company : A company which is not a private company is called public company. A public
company must have at least 7 members. There is no restriction on the maximum number of members.
The name of a public company ends with the word 'Limited’. e.g. Karnavati Textiles Limited, Infosys
Technologies Limited.

Based on liability of members or shareholders, the companies are mainly of three types :
(1) Company Limited by Shares : In these companies, liability of the shareholders is limited
upto the extent of the face value of shares held by them. Most of the companies are of this kind.

(2) Company Limited by Guarantee : In such companies, at the time of liquidation, the liability
of shareholders is limited to a specified amount as guaranteed. Usually, such companies are not for the
purpose of earning profit but it is formed for the purpose of promoting different activities like arts,
science, sports, culture, social welfare etc. e.g. Board of control for cricket in India.

(3) Company by Unlimited Liability : In this type of company there is no limit on the liability of
its members. It means, when a company suffers loss and the company's property is not sufficient to pay
off its debts, the private property of its members will be used to meet the claims of creditors. As the
risk involved in such companies is too high, such companies are not found in India even though
permitted by the companies act.

Types of Companies

 

 

Based on Establishment Based on Registration
I
Based on Liability of Members

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Company Limited Company Limited Company by
by Shares by Guarantee Unlimited Liability
I
I I I
Public Private One Person
Company Company Company
2

 

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
3. Share and Share Capital : Meaning, Nature and Types

Capital of company is called Share Capital, which can be divided into transferable small
denominations. Each such unit of denomination is known as Share.

To raise capital, company issues prospectus as required by law and invites public to purchase its
shares. Those who purchase shares of company are called members or shareholders of company.
As long as the share(s) are held by this person, he is called shareholder or co-owner of the company.
For shareholders, who has purchased or is in possession of the shares, indicate the proportion (ratio) of his
ownership in the company. Each share is alloted a distinctive number. Share is an asset which is
movable and transferable.

According to the companies act, a company may issue two types of shares : (1) Preference
share and (2) Equity share.

(1) Preference Share : Preference share is one which gives preferential right to its holder for
receiving the dividend at a specified rate before any dividend paid to equity share holder. When the
company goes into liquidation the preference share holder has the preferential right for repayment of capital
before the equity shareholder.

Types of preference shares are as under :

(i) Cumulative and Non-cumulative Preference Share : In case of cumulative preference

shares, if in any year the dividend on preference shares is not paid due to insufficient profit, such
arrears of dividend shall be paid together with current year dividend in the year when there is

sufficient profit.

As against this, in case of non-cumulative preference shares, such arrears of dividend are not
accumulated and are not paid in future.

(ii) Redeemable and Irredeemable Preference Share : If the amount of preference share

is to be repaid (redeemed) by the company at the end of the stipulated period or after giving proper
notice to the holder of the preference shares, such shares are called redeemable preference

shares.

A preference share which are redeemed only at the time of liquidation of company are called
Irredeemable preference shares. After the implementation of Companies Act, 2013, company limited
by share does not issue irredeemable preference shares.

(iii) Participating and Non-participating Preference Share : Preference shareholders who
hold participating preference shares get fixed rate of dividend as decided by the company. In addition
to this, they also have a right to participate in surplus profit remaining after distribution of specified
dividend to equity shareholders subject to terms of participation. In the event of winding up of the
company, if after paying the capital amount of both the preference and equity shareholders, there is still
some surplus left, such shareholders are entitled to receive a proportion of surplus. This type of
preference shares are called participating preference shares.

Preference shareholder's of non-participating preference shares get only a fixed rate of dividend
and do not carry a right to participate in the surplus profits or in any surplus capital.

(iv) Convertible and Non-convertible Preference Share : The preference shares which can
be convereted partly or fully into equity shares as per agreed terms at the time of issue are known as

convertible preference shares.

 

Accounting for Share Capital
The preference shares which are not convertible into equity shares are known as non-convertible
preference shares. Usually, the preference shares are non-convertible.

(2) Equity Share or Ordinary Share :
as equity shares. Equity shareholders have voting rights in the company's meeting. Dividend on equity
shares which is decided by the board of directors and approved by the shareholders in the general

The shares, which are not preference shares, are known

meeting is given only out of the profit remaining after distribution of dividend on preference shares
at fixed rate.

Company gives a dividend on equity shares every year on the basis of current year's profit,
profit of the previous years, accumulated reserves, possibilities of future profits and also management
policy of the company.

At the time of liquidation of company, from the balance funds equity shareholders have right of
repayment of capital only after returning preference share capital.

Equity share capital is known as principal share capital of the company. According to current
provisions of the companies act, the equity share should have a minimum face value of = 1. In the
present scenario, most of the company have face value of each share is ¥ 1 or 10 or & 100.

Distinction Between Preference Share and Equity Share :

 

 

 

 

 

 

Basis of Preference Shares Equity Shares
Distinction
(1) | Rate of dividend} Dividend on preference shares are | The rate of dividend on equity shares
paid at a fixed rate. is not fixed. It may vary from year to
year depending upon the availability of
profits.

(2) | Arrears of If dividend is not paid on cumulative} Arrears of dividend on equity shares

dividend shares in any year, the arrears of can not be accumulated and so it is not
dividend is paid against company's paid against company's profit in
profit in future. future.

(3) | Preferential right} They have a right to receive Payment of dividend on equity shares
as to the payment} dividend before any dividend is is made after the payment of
of dividend paid on equity shares. preference dividend.

(4) | Preferential right] Preference shareholders have a Equity share capital is paid only when
as to the right to return of preference share- | preference share capital is paid out
payment of capital in the case of winding up, fully.
capital before any capital is returned to

equity shareholders.

(5) | Voting rights Preference shareholders do not Equity shareholders have voting

have any voting rights. rights.

(6) | Right to They do not have a right to They have full right to participate
participate in participate in management of the in management of the company.
management company.

 

 

Elements of Accounts

: Part IT: Std. 12

 
Types of Share Capital :

(i) Authorised/Nominal/Registered Capital : The maximum amount which a company can
accumulate by share capital during its lifetime, is called authorised share capital. It is stated in the
memorandum of association and also stated at the time of registration. Hence, it's called registered capital.
If there is a need to increase the authorised capital of a company in future, the same can be increased by
passing a resolution in the general meeting of shareholders of company and also as per provisions of
companies act.

Authorised capital is also called nominal capital. For example, authorised capital of ABC limited is
% 1,00,00,000 (one crore) divided into 10,00,000 equity shares of = 10 each.

(ii) Issued Capital : The share capital issued by issue of shares out of authorised capital based
on the need of the company in full or part is known as issued capital. For example, if 7,00,000 shares
are issued out of authorised capital of 10,00,000 shares of = 10 each, = 70,00,000 is known as issued
capital of the company, being 7,00,000 shares of = 10 each. Issued capital should not be more than
authorised capital.

(iii) Subscribed Capital : The value of shares for which applications are received out of issued
share capital is known as subscribed capital. Subscribed share capital can be equal to or less than the
issued capital. Even if share applications are received for more number of shares than the issued
shares, company can allot shares only to the extent of share issued.

(iv) Called up Capital : Company can call up an amount equal to face value of shares or lesser
amount from the applicants to whom the share are allotted. When company calls for lesser amount of the
share, the balance amount can be called in future from the shareholders. Such amount called up on
shares is known as called-up capital. For example, if company has called up = 6 per share on 7,00,000
share of = 10 each, the called up capital will be = 42,00,000.

(v) Uncalled Capital : It is a part of subscribed capital. A capital which is not yet called
from the shareholders by the board of directors of the company is called uncalled capital. Uncalled
capital is difference between subscribed capital and called up capital. E.g. If the company has called
for = 6 per share on a share of face value of = 10 each than % 4 per share is considered as uncalled
capital.

(vi) Paid up Capital : The amount received by the company from shareholders out of called up
capital is known as paid up capital. If shareholder does not pay the amount called for any reason, there
will be difference between the called up capital and paid up capital. For example, called up capital is
% 42,00,000 (7,00,000 share X % 6 per share). If a shareholder holding 1000 shares could not pay first
called money of & 2 per share, than paid up capital shall be = 41,98,000 (% 42,00,000 — & 2000).

(vii) Reserve Capital : When management of the company feels that the called up capital is
sufficient for the business requirement of the company and no further capital is required in future, the
uncalled capital is converted into reserve capital by passing special resolution in the meeting of
shareholders. Capital so reserved is known as Reserve capital. Such reserved capital can be called up
from shareholders only when the company goes into liquidation. Special resolution passed to this effect

can not be cancelled.

 

Accounting for Share Capital
Classification of Share Capital

Authorised Capital

—oOoO

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Issued capital Reserve capital
I
Subscribed capital
Called up capital Uncalled capital

 

 

 

 

I
Paid up capital

 

 

 

 

Capital Reserve : Capital reserve are those reserves which are created out of capital profit.
Capital profits are those profits which are not earned in the normal course of the business. These
reserves can not be utilised for the distribution of dividends. Following transactions give rise to
capital profit, which is to be transfered to capital reserved :

(1) Profit on sale of fixed assets

(2) Profit on revaluation of fixed assets

(3) Profit prior to incorporation of company

(4) Premium on issue of shares and debentures

(5) Profit on redemption of debentures

(6) Profit on re-issue of forfeited shares
4. Steps for Issue of Equity Shares

Company raises its capital by issuing equity share to public or by private placement. Detailed
discussion/information about this is as under :

(A) For Shares Issued for Public :

(i) Permission for Issue : Government of India made an important amendment in 1991 by
repealing capital issues (control) act, 1947 and established Securities and Exchange Board of India - SEBI.
Earlier, the companies were required to seek prior approval of government for public issue of shares
but now such company will have to prepare an offer document in accordance with SEBI guidelines
and other legal requirements and submit the same to SEBI. Only after verification of the offer document
by SEBI, they give permission for public issue of shares to the company.

(ii) Details of Proposal to be sent to SEBI : In the offer document or proposal, the company
has to disclose the number of shares issued, type of the share issued and issue price of each share. In
addition to this, details regarding full amount to be paid at the time of application or amount to be called
up in installments is also provided.

(iii) Offer to Public : After complying with the formalities relating to public issue, the company
invites public for subscription to shares by issue of prospectus. Company informs the details about
subscription of shares to public by newspapers, by T.V. or by hoardings.

(iv) Details Shown in Prospectus : Normally following contents are shows in prospectus : Name
and address of the registered office of the company, name and address of the directors, objects of the

 

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
company, risks involved in the company, consent from SEBI, authorised and issued capital of the
company and the number of shares now offered for subscription, dates of opening and closing of the
issue, name and address of the merchant's bank, guidelines about past year's and future working of
the company, etc.

(v) For Share Application : After reading the prospectus, the public applies for shares in the
company on a prescribed form. Each application must accompany the number of shares applied, name
and address of applicant, their bank account number, their name and number of demat account and
also amount of total application money.

The amount of share application money by cheque or draft with application form must be
deposited by the applicant in the scheduled bank which is specified by the company. The name of
the scheduled bank is mentioned in the prospectus.

Provision for amount to be called up on application are as under :

(i) According to section 39 of Companies Act, 2013 application money on shares should be

minimum 5 % of face value of shares.

(ii) As per the present rules of SEBI, the amount to be paid with application of shares by

applicant, should not be less than 25 % of issued price of the share.

As per section 24 of Companies Act, 2013 SEBI provisions are applicable for issue of any
securities and its transfer, provision as per company law board has not been applicable.

In the present scenario, according to SEBI guidelines new arrangement has been established for
share application in the public issue of the company. It's known as ASBA. To make the students familiar
about this arrangement a detailed information is given at the end of the chapter.

(vi) When Shares are Alloted : When the company receives the application forms, the shares are
either fully or partially allotted to the applicant. Those applicants who are alloted shares, are sent ‘Letters
of Allotment’ by the company, in which number of shares allotted by the company to them are indicated.
Those who are not allotted any single share by the company are sent 'Letter of Regret’ along with
a cheque for the refund of application money and now it is directly deposited in the applicant's bank
account.

If company receives more or less number of share applicants than total number of issued shares
from the applicant then provision for this has been discussed in the next point of this chapter.

(vii) Balance Amount by Instalments : Generally company calls for the full amount with share
application or allotment. If company has not called up full amount with share application or allotment, the
balance can be called up in one or more installments. Calls must be made strictly in accordance with
the provisions of the Articles of Association. In the absence of the Articles of Association, the
provisions of table F of schedule I of the companies act, 2013 shall apply.

(viii) Other Important Points : When shares are issued by company, the company has to
necessarily contract with minimum one merchant bank or scheduled bank for its arrangement, for its
transparency and also for financial transactions.

Before issue of shares, company has to compulsorily contract with depository for demat of
shares. Sometimes company give an option to shareholders to get the shares in demat form or in
physical form. In present circumstances it is compulsory to open demat account.

Any person can open or keep the demat account in any bank or any financial institution who
holds legal permission to keep the demat accounts.

 

Accounting for Share Capital
Demat account is just like saving account or current account in the bank. Entry for money
transactions are kept in saving a/c or current a/c. In the same manner entry for purchase and sales
transactions of the shares are kept in demat account.

When any person purchases the shares, then number of purchased shares are credited means
added to his demat account and when any number of shares are sold then it is debited means deducted
from his account.

(B) Shares Issued by Private Placement :

As per the Companies Act, 2013 a company may issue shares on private placement basis also.
Sometimes the promoters of a public company are confident of raising capital through private
sources and contacts. In such a case the company does not invite the public to subscribe for its
shares, but make private placement of shares to promoters, their friends, their relatives, mutual funds,
shareholders of group companies, non-resident indians, financial institutions like Life Insurance
Corporation of India (LIC), Unit Trust of India (UTI), Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of
India (ICICI, etc.

When the shares are not offered to the public, the company need not issue a prospectus. Instead of
issuing a prospectus, the promoters are required to prepare a draft prospectus known as a ‘Statement
in Lieu of Prospectus' and must file it with the registrar at least 3 days before the first allotment of
either shares or debentures.

In case of private placement of shares, the allottees will not sell their shares for a certain
minimum period from the date of allotment. This period is known as 'lock-in-period’.

5. Over Subscription and Under Subscription of Shares

If applications are received for more number of shares than the shares issued for public
subscription, it is known as over subscription. As company cannot allot more shares than the shares
issued, it has to refund excess application money to applicants of shares.

In these circumstances, company may (i) allot full number of shares or (ii) not allot
any share or (iii) allot partially number of shares to the share applicants against their share
application.

If applications are received for less number of shares than the shares issued, it is known as under
subscription. According to the SEBI guidelines, company must get share application money for at least
90 % of the amount called up by public subscription. This minimum amount of subscription should
be received within 30 days from the date of issue of prospectus. If company fails to get minimum
subscription then company can not allot any share and within 15 days total amount should be
returned to the applicants. If company fails to return this amount within 15 days then interest at
the rate of 15 % p.a. has to be paid for each day.

6.  I.P.O. and F.P.O.

An initial public offering (IPO) is the first time that the share/stock of a private company is
offered for purchase to the public.

If a company has already issued the shares to the public through IPO process and wants to increase
the capital fund, then "Follow-on Public Offer" (F.P.O.) is issued by the company to public or to investors.
7. Methods for Issue of Shares by Company

Company can issue its shares by three ways :

8

 

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
(1) At par : If the total amount payable by share subscribers to company is equal to the total
face value of shares, the shares are said to be issued at par. For example, share of face value of
= 10 issued at a price of = 10.

(2) At premium : If the total amount payable by share subscribers to company is more than
the total face value of shares, the shares are said to be issued at premium. For example, if share of
face value of = 10 issued at a price of ~ 14, the additional amount of = 4 shall be considered as

premium.
Present provisions as per Companies Act, 2013 and accounting effects of shares issued at

premium has been discussed in detail in the following point in this chapter.

(3) Issue of Shares at Discount : If the total amount payable by share subscribers to a company
is less than the total face value of shares, the shares are said to be issued at discount. For example,
if share of face value of = 10 is issued at a price of = 9, the amount of = 1 shall be considered as
discount.

As per section 53 of Companies Act, 2013, companies would no longer be permitted to
issue shares at a discount.

The only shares that could be issued at a discount are sweat equity wherein shares are issued
to employees or directors in lieu of their services under section 54 of 2013 Act.

8. Share Capital Transactions and Its Accounting Effects

The following journal entries shall be passed in the books of the company in respect of share
capital transactions :

e On Share Application :

(1) When share application money is received,

 

Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (%) | Credit (2)

 

Bank A/c Dr ||, seseseeeseseeeee
To Share application A/c
[Being recepit of share application money on

seeseesees shares at Z .......... per share. |

 

(2) When applications are received for more shares than the shares issued and excess
application money is to be refunded to share applicants,

 

Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (%) | Credit (2)

 

Share application A/c Dr fo] saeeeeeeeeeeeee
To Bank A/c
[Being refund of share application money at

 

ZT eeesesees per share on .......... shares due to

non-allotment of shares. |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) When board of directors of the company approves the allotment of shares, then share

application money in respect of share alloted is transferred to share capital account.

 

9
Accounting for Share Capital
 

Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (=) | Credit (€)

 

Share application A/c Dr
To Share capital A/c

[Being transfer of share application money at
Teese per share to share capital account in

 

 

respect of ...... shares allotted. ]

 

 

 

 

 

e On Share Allotment :

(4) The applicants who are allotted shares become shareholders of the company. When share
allotment money is called from shareholders then...

 

Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (=) | Credit (€)

 

Share allotment A/c Dr ||. seseseseseeeseee
To Share capital A/c
[Being amount due on allotment on ........ shares

at the rate of Tw... per share. ]

 

(5) When the amount due on allotment is received

 

Date Particulars L.F. Debit (2) Credit (2)

 

Bank A/c Dr

To Share allotment Alo Jf aeaeeeeeeeseeee

[Being amount received on allotment on ..........

shares at the rate of =

 

 

 

 

 

 

per share. ]

 

 

e On Share First Call :

(6) When the first call is made after receiving the allotment money

 

 

Date Particulars LF. Debit (2) Credit (%)
Share first call A/c Dr || ceeeeseeseseeees
To Share capital Alo eeeeeeee tees
[Being first call due on .......... shares at the
rate of Tw per share. |

 

(7) When the share first call money is received

 

Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (=) | Credit (%)

 

Bank A/c Dr
To Share first call A/c

[Being first call money received. ]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
When the share second and third calls are made and when the call money is received, journal entries
will be passed in the same manner as shown in entries (6) and (7) as above. In such case, in place of
'share first call', share second call or third call or final call shall be written.

Illustration 1 : Shailja company Itd. issued 2,40,000 equity shares of 10 each, on which the amounts

called up was as under :

On application = 3 per share
On allotment = 3 per share
On first call = 2 per share
On final call = 2 per share

Amounts called on allotment and calls were received in full on time. Applications were received for
all shares. Pass journal entries in the books of company.
Also prepare equity share capital account, equity share application account, equity share allotment

account, equity share first call account and equity share final call account.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ans. :
Journal Entries in the Books of Shailja Company Ltd.
Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (%) | Credit (2)
1 Bank A/c Dr 7,20,000
