Authorised Capital :
seeesees equity shares of @ ....... each
ceeeees preference shares of & ....... each

Issued Capital :

. equity shares of = .

    

. preference shares of =

 

Subscribed Capital :
Subscribed and Fully Paid Capital :

seeesees equity shares of @ ....... each

seeesees preference shares of @ ....... each
(Of the above shares ........ shares are allotted as fully
paid up pursuant to a contract without payments being
received in cash.)
Subscribed But Not Fully Paid Capital :

seseeese shares of @ ....... each

Less : Calls in arrears :

 

 

 

 

Tees per share called-up Teese

(i) By directors and officers of the company ~ ........
(ii) By others Tce
Add : Forfeited shares TF eeesees

 

(2) Reserve and Surplus :

 

 

Securities premium reserve

Capital reserve

 

 

 

 

 

 

17. Some Important Issues

(1) Preferential Allotment : Preferential allotment means allotment of shares at a predetermined
price to the pre-identified people. Here preferential people means who are interested in taking a
strategic stake in the company such as promoters, venture capitalists, financial institutions, buyers
of company's products or its suppliers. The company is required to pass special resolution in the

meeting of shareholders before proceeding with preferential allotment.

 

54
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12

 
(2) Sweat Equity Shares : A company may issue sweat equity shares as per sec. 54 of
Companies Act, 2013. Sweat equity shares means equity shares issued by the company to its
employees or directors at a discount or for consideration other than cash for providing know-how or
making available intellectual property rights.

The issue of such shares is authorised by a special resolution passed by the company. The class
of such shares should be of the class already issued earlier. The resolution so passed should specify
the number of shares issued, what is current market price of it, how much consideration is decided
against this issue, if any other matter and classes of directors or employees to whom such shares are
to be issued.

If this type of shares are listed on a stock exchange then it should be issued in accordance
with the regulations made by the SEBI. Company may issue this type of shares at a price lower than
the nominal value of equity share. Such shares cannot be resold by their holders within a period of
3 years from the date of shares received, this is called lock-in-period.

The entries for issue of sweat equity shares are the same as for issue of other equity shares.

(3) Employees Stock Option Plan - ESOP : Employees Stock Option Plan means option
granted by the company to its employees and to subscribe the shares at a price that is lower
than the market price, i.e. fair value. It is option or right granted by the company in good faith
but it is not an obligation on the employee to subscribe it. The employees may or may not exercise the
option.

These shares are of the same class of shares already issued. It is authorised by a special
resolution passed by the company. Employees stock option plan is a category of sweat equity
shares.

(4) Applications Supported by Blocked Amount - ASBA : ASBA is a process developed by
the Indian stock market regulator SEBI for applying to IPO. In ASBA, an IPO applicant's account
doesn't get debited until shares are allotted to them.

Earlier Qualified Institutional Buyers (QIBs) were not allowed to participate in IPOs through
ASBA facility.

Currently as per SEBI guidelines, non-retail investors i.e. Qualified Institutional Buyers and
Non-institutional Investors, making application in public/rights issue shall mandatory make use of
ASBA facility.

ASBA process facilitates retail individual investors bidding at a cut-off, with a single option, to
apply through Self Certified Syndicate Banks (SCSBs), in which the investors have bank accounts.
SCSBs are those banks which satisfy the conditions laid by SEBI. SCSBs would accept the
applications, verify the application, block the fund to the extent of bid payment amount, upload the
details in the web based bidding system of NSE, unblock once basis of allotment is finalized and
transfer the amount for all shares to the issuer.

ASBA means "Applications Supported by Blocked Amount". ASBA is an application containing an
authorization to block the application money in the bank account, for subscribing to an issue. If an
investor is applying through ASBA, his application money on allotted shares shall be debited from the
bank account only if his/her application is selected for allotment after the basis of allotment is finalized
or when shares is not allotted, then control on block amount is withdrawn.

55

 

Accounting for Share Capital
ASBA is stipulated by SEBI and available from most of the banks operating in India. This allows
the investors money to remain with the bank till the shares are allotted after the IPO. This amount
cannot be utilised by applicants. When shares are allotted only then required amount is transfered
out of the investors account to the company's account. This eliminates the need for refunds on shares
not being allotted.

In present scenario, investors may submit their ASBA applications to these SCSBs in order to
apply for public issues. The list of SCSBs include banks likes Axis Bank, HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank,
State Bank of India, Punjab National Bank, IDBI Bank and others.

There is no difference in both the methods of application, by ASBA and without ASBA for
allotment of shares.

 

EXERCISE
