
 

Py

Contents :
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Linear Regression Model
3.3 Fitting of Regression Line
3.3.1 Method of Scatter Diagram
3.3.2 Method of Least Squares
3.4 Utility of the study of Regression
3.5 Regression Coefficient from Covariance and Correlation Coefficient
3.6 Coefficient of Determination
3.7. Properties of Regression Coefficient

3.8 Precautions while using Regression

 

116
Statistics : Part 1: Standard 12 YR
3.1 Introduction

In the previous chapter 2, we have studied the concept of correlation. We have seen whether the
correlation between two variables is positive or negative is known by the correlation coefficient. Moreover,
we get numerical measure of the closeness of the variables. But the coefficient of correlation fails to
provide the expected value of one variable for the given value of the other variable. When some relation
exists between two variables, many times it is necessary to obtain the approximate or estimated value
of one variable for a known value of the other variable using this relation.

e.g. We know that there is a correlation between advertisement cost and sale of an item. Now,
for some given amount of advertisement cost, if we want to know the corresponding expected sale then
it is not possible to obtain it only by correlation. For this, it is necessary to use the concept of regression.

The literal meaning of regression is ‘to avert’ or ‘return to the mean value’. The term regression
was first used by a statistician Sir Francis Galton during his study of human inheritance. He had
collected the information about the height of 1000 pairs of fathers and sons. He revealed the following
interesting results.

(i) Tall fathers have tall sons and short fathers have short sons.

(ii) The average height of sons of a group of tall fathers is less than average height of group
of tall fathers.

(iii) The average height of sons of a group of short fathers is greater than average height of group

of short fathers.

So, it is clear from the above findings that the heights of sons show regressive tendency with respect
to the height of their fathers. The existence of this tendency restricts the humans to split into two races
of pigmies and giants. So, Sir Francis Galton has given the name regression to describe such relation.

Regression is a functional relation between two correlated variables. We shall study the concept
of regression under the assumption that there exists a cause-effect relationship between two variables.

3.2 Linear Regression Model

A set of one or more equations representing a relation or a problem is called a model. A statistical
model which describes the cause and effect relationship between two variables is called a regression
model. Generally, out of two variables having cause-effect relationship, the causal variable is denoted by
X. We shall call this variable as independent or explanatory variable and effect variable is denoted by
Y. We shall call this variable as dependent or explained variable. Let us understand the meaning of
independent variable and dependent variable from the following illustrations :

(i) In case of ‘advertisement cost’ and ‘sales’, generally, because of increase (decrease) in the
‘advertisement cost’, corresponding ‘sales’ also increases (decreases), so we shall take
‘advertisement cost’ as independent variable X and ‘sales’ as dependent variable Y.

(ii) In case of ‘rainfall’ and ‘yield of rice’ in some region, it is very clear that ‘yield of rice’ depends on
‘rainfall’. So, we shall take ‘rainfall’ as independent variable X and ‘yield of rice’ as dependent
variable Y.

In a regression model, the dependent variable Y is expressed in the form of an appropriate
mathematical function of the independent variable X.
Now, we shall define a linear regression model as follows.

Y=a+PX+u
Where, y = Dependent Variable

X = Independent Variable
a = Constant

8B = Constant

u

= Disturbance Variable of the Model

(17)
YY Linear Regression
The inadequacy of the linearity between two variables X and Y is shown by uw. The perfect linear
relation is possible in natural science like mathematics. So, the disturbance variable u obviously becomes
0 in such a case. In other words, when there is a perfect linear correlation between two variables X

and Y then the regression model is Y=a+X. But we know that exact linear relation between the

variables is not always possible in business, economics and social science as these correlated variables
are also affected by other factors. Thus, when there is a partial correlation between the variables X

and Y then the linear regression model is Y=a+$X-+u. From the above discussion, we can define
linear regression in simple words as follows.

“A mathematical or functional relationship between two correlated variables which helps in estimating
the value of dependent variable for some given (known) value of independent variable is called Linear
Regression.”

3.3 Fitting of Regression Line

In a scatter diagram of two correlated variables, if the points are clustered around a line, we can
say that there is a linear regression. The method of obtaining such a line expressing the relation between

two variables is called fitting of a regression line.
There are two methods for fitting a regression line : (1) Method of Scatter Diagram (2) Method

of Least Squares.

3.3.1 Method of Scatter Diagram

Suppose n ordered pairs of observations of two correlated variables X and Y are

(x, y), (x, Yo), veseseee A(X, y,)- Using this data, we draw a scatter diagram. Now, a line is drawn in such a

way that it is close to almost all the points of the scatter diagram. If Y is a dependent variable and X is an
independent variable then such a line is called regression line of Y on X and an approximate value of
dependent variable Y can be obtained for any given value of independent variable X from it. Since no
computation is required to draw such a line, it is very easy and quick method of fitting a regression line. But
there is a problem in doing so. Different persons may draw different lines. As a result, different persons may
provide different estimates of the dependent variable Y for the same value of independent variable X. It can
be seen very easily from the following scatter diagram.

Two different persons have drawn two

y

different lines J, and /, in the following scatter
v L diagram of the same data. We can see that for
Vp some value ‘a’ of independent variable X,

corresponding estimated value is ‘ y,’ from line

|, and it is ‘ y)’ from the line 1, . Thus we get

different estimates for dependent variable Y
from different lines for a single value of
Oo | * independent variable X. So, it can be said that

this method is subjective. A line of regression
drawn by this method is not the best fitted line because it does not guarantee the best estimate of the dependent

 

 

variable. The method of least square is used to obtain such a best fitted regression line.

 

Statistics : Part 1: Standard 12 U8)
3.3.2 Method of Least Squares

Suppose n ordered pairs of observations of two correlated variables X (independent variable) and

Y (dependent variable) are (x,, y,), (x25 ¥2)s----- (Xs Yn) We shall draw a scatter diagram for this data

to understand the method of least squares.

y

     
 

Gs In)
Oi ¥)

CY) Os Fay

ey

(%, Ya)

 

*t

an error in the estimation. It is denoted by e; .
*. € =Y¥,— Fj =I; — (a+ bx) =, -a—by,
Where, i=1, 2, 3,.......,.2

If an equation of the best fitted
line describing the linear regression
between the variables X and Y is

§=a+bx then the constants a and
b of this line can be obtained by the
method of least squares as follows.

Let the estimated values of
variable Y corresponding to values

Ms Xa 3

Ips Jas F535 , from the line and
the corresponding observed values

of Y are yy, Yas Vgyeee Vp
respectively. Now, for some

.»X, of variable X are

 

  

X =x,, estimated value of Y from

the line is §, = a+bx,. The vertical
distance (i.e. distance parallel to
Y-axis) between observed value y;

and the estimated value $, is called

Obviously, the error will be positive for points above the line the error will be negative for points
below the line and it will be zero for the points which are on the line.

Now, the values of constants a and b of the fitted line $=a+bx (known as regression line of

Y on X) are obtained in such a way that the sum of the squares of the errors is minimum.

ie. Le? = X(y,- ay =2(y,-a—bx;)” is minimum.

By ignoring the suffix i for convenience, we can get such values of a and b by a simple algebraic

method, which are as follows.

3(x-X)(y-7
+ eaten
n&xy-(Ex)(Zy)
nx?(Ex)?
And
a=y-bx

The line $=a+bx obtained by this method is a line passing as close as possible to the points
of scatter diagram. The sum of squares of the errors is minimised while obtaining the regression line.

Therefore, this method is called ‘method of least squares’.

 

(19>
®

Linear Regression
The value of b obtained by this method is called the regression coefficient of the regression line of Y on
X. b is also called slope of the regression line and the constant a is called intercept of the regression line.

Interpretation of regression coefficient b
b =the estimated change in the value of Y for a unit change in the value of X.

ie. when 5b>0, it means that a unit increase in the value of independent variable X implies
an estimated increase of 5 units in the value of dependent variable Y.

when p<0, it means that a unit increase in the value of independent variable X implies
an estimated decrease of | units in the value of dependent variable Y.

Note that the regression line obtained by the method of least squares is also known as the line
of best fit.

Note : (1) The regression coefficient b can also be denoted by ,,. If not required, generally we shall
denote regression coefficient by b only.

(2) Ifall the points in a scatter diagram are on one line only then error will be zero for all the points.

Hence, the estimated value } is same as its observed value y. So, the form of the regression

line will be y=a+bx in place of $=a+bx. Naturally, in this situation r is 1 if b>0

andr is—l if b<0.

Additional Information for understanding

Generally, only ‘fitted line’ is mentioned for the regression line obtained instead of ‘best
fitted line’.

 

 

Now, let us take some examples to obtain a regression line.
Illustration 1 : The following observations are obtained for life (years of usage) of cars and their
average annual maintenance costs of a specific model of car of a particular company.

 

Life of cars (years) 2 4 6 8

Average annual maintenance cost (thousand %) 10 20 25 30

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Obtain the regression line of maintenance cost on the life of cars. Also, estimate the
maintenance cost if the life of a car is 10 years.

‘Life of a car’ is an independent variable. So, we shall denote it by variable X and ‘maintenance
cost’ is dependent variable. So, we shall denote it by Y. Considering at the data, we shall prepare the
following table for obtaining the regression line.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Life of Maintenance cost] xy x?
car (years) x (thousand %) y
2 10 20 4
4 20 80 16
6 25 150 36
8 30 240 64
Total 20 85 490 120

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Statistics : Part 1 : Standard 12 Woy
Let us find the regression coefficient as follows.

_ n&xy-(Ex)(Zy)
~ n3x?-(Ex)?

4(490)-{20)(85)
4(120)-(20)?

1960-1700
480-400

= 260
80

3.25

*. b=3.25
Now, putting the values of x,y and bin the formula of a,
a =y-bx
= 21.25—3.25(5)
=21.25-16.25
a=5
So, the regression line of ‘maintenance cost’ (Y) on ‘life of car’ (X) is
p=atbx
$=543.25 x
Putting X =10,
} =5+3.25(10)
=5+32.5=37.5
$ =37.5
So, when the life of a car is 10 years then its estimated maintenance cost is ¥ 37.5 thousand Note
: Since b=3.25, we can say that every year (one unit change in X), the maintenance cost of the car
increases by approximately % 3.25 thousand (change in Y).

Illustration 2 : The monthly sale of different types of laptops (in hundred units) and its profit
(in lakh %) for the last six months for a company is given below.

 

 

 

