
 

 

 

 

Calculate the rank correlation coefficient.
An entrance test required to study abroad is conducted online. The marks obtained in
Reasoning Ability and English Speaking in this online test (having negative marking system

for wrong answer) by 5 students selected in a sample are given below.

 

 

 

Student A B Cc D E
Marks in Reasoning Ability 5 5 5 5 5
Marks in English Speaking 2 2 2 0 2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Find the rank correlation coefficient between Reasoning Ability and ability in English Speaking.

Six dancers A, B, C, D, E and F in a dance competition were judged by two dance Gurus.

The ranks assigned to the dancers are as follows.

 

 

 

Rank 1 2 3 4 5 6
By Guru 1 B F A Cc D E
By Guru 2 F A Cc B E D

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Find the rank correlation coefficient between the judgement of the two Gurus.

The following data is obtained for two variables, inflation (X) and interest rate (Y).

n=50, =x=500, Ly =300, Ex? =5450, Ly? =2000, Exy =3090
Later on, it was known that one pair of observation (10, 6) was included additionally by
mistake. Find the correlation coefficient by excluding this pair of observations.

The information regarding sales (X) and expenses (Y) of 10 firms is given below.

¥=58, F=14, ¥(x-65) =850, ¥(y—13)? =32, D(x-65) (y—-13) =0

Find the correlation coefficient.

Daily calorie intake of ten persons is Y and their weight is Y kg. The rank correlation
coefficient from this information is 0.6. On subsequent verification, it was noticed that the
difference of ranks of X and Y for one of the persons was taken as 2 instead of 4. Find

the correct value of rank correlation coefficient.

 

Statistics :

(114)
Part 1: Standard 12 Ye
12. The information of health index x and life expectancy y is obtained for 10 people. These
data are ranked to find the rank correlation coefficient and the sum of squares of the
ranks was found to be 42.5. It was also observed that health index 70 was repeated
three times and life-expectancy 45 was repeated twice in the data. Find the rank correlation

coefficient using this information.

 

 

Charles Edward Spearman was an English
psychologist known for work in statistics, as a pioneer
of factor analysis and for Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient. He also did seminal work on models for
human intelligence, including his theory that disparate
cognitive test scores reflect a single General
intelligence factor and coining the term g-factor.

After serving army for 15 years, he went on to
study for a Ph.D. in experimental psychology.
Spearman joined University College London and
stayed there until he retired in 1931. Initially he was
Reader and head of the small psychological laboratory.
In 1911 he was promoted to the Grote professorship
of the Philosophy of Mind and Logic. His title changed
to Professor of Psychology in 1928 when a separate
Department of Psychology was created.

Charles Edward Spearman His many published papers cover a wide field,
(1863 -1945)

 

but he is especially distinguished by his pioneer work
in the application of mathematical methods to the
analysis of the human mind and his original studies of
correlation in this sphere.

 

 

 

©)

Linear Correlation
“Prediction is very difficult, especially about the future.”

— Niels Bohr

Linear Regression

 

Py

Contents :
