2.1 Introduction

We have studied the characteristics of only one variable in the chapters of measures of central tendency,
dispersion, skewness, etc. in 11th Standard. So far our study was restricted to the distribution of one variable.
But many situations arise in which it is desirable and necessary to study two or more variables at a time.
e.g. If we study the yearly sale of a product of a company, we would also like to know its profit as from
that we can find the nature and degree of relation between these two variables ‘sale of product’ and ‘profit’.
The yearly rainfall and yield of rice in some region, price and demand for an item, income and expenditure
of a family, height of father and height of his son, age of husband and age of wife, etc. are some well-known
examples where we see the relation between paired variables. Similarly, we come across many situations
in which two variables are related.

We shall study about the relationship between two mutually related variables in this and the next chapter.

Note :

e A distribution is said to be univariate distribution if it is obtained by collecting the information
of one variable. e.g. The distribution of marks obtained by students in a subject, monthly income
of persons working in a company, age of drivers of state transport (ST) buses.

e The information obtained for two different characteristics of a unit at the same time is called
bivariate data and the distribution obtained from it is known as bivariate distribution. e.g. The
distribution of price and supply of an item, monthly expenditure and saving of families of a
group, age of husband and age of wife.

e@ The simultaneous changes in the values of more than two variables can be studied by multiple
and partial correlation but here we shall study correlation between only two variables.

2.2 Meaning and Definition of Linear Correlation

 

Let us first understand the meaning of correlation. We know that in many situations, simultaneous
changes are seen in the values of two variables. The simultaneous changes in the values of two variables

are mainly due to the following reasons.
(1) There is a cause-effect relation between two variables.

(2) The values of two variables change due to the effect of some other factor.

In case of yearly rainfall and yield of rice of a region, usually if rainfall increases (up to some
extent), yield of rice also increases and if rainfall decreases, yield of rice also decreases. So, ‘rainfall’
is a ‘cause’ and ‘yield of rice’ is an ‘effect’. Similarly, when the income of a person remains more
or less same, if his expenditure increases, saving decreases and if his expenditure decreases, saving
increases. ‘Expenditure’ is a ‘cause’ here and ‘savings’ is the ‘effect’. The changes in two variables
in the above two examples indicate cause-effect relationship. Sometimes both the variables may be mutually
dependent and therefore neither can be specifically said as the ‘cause’ and the other the ‘effect’. Generally,
it happens in case of economic variables. e.g. demand and supply. If demand increases, it is necessary
to increase supply (which is not always possible instantly) and when supply increases, price tend to decrease
and because of that demand goes up. Thus, demand and supply are interdependent. The ages of husband
and age of wife is also an example of such situation.

In case of sale of raincoats and sale of rain shoes, the values of both the variables increase in
monsoon. There is no direct cause-effect relation here between two variables but the changes in the
sale of raincoats and rain shoes are observed due to the presence of the third variable, namely the monsoon.
This is an example of indirect cause-effect relationship.

 

(>
G9)

Linear Correlation
After discussing the examples of the relationship between two variables, we can define correlation
as follows. If there are simultaneous changes in the values of two variables due to direct or indirect
cause-effect then it is said that there is correlation between two variables. The correlation is said to
be linear correlation, if the points plotted on the graph paper corresponding to ordered pairs of the
values of two correlated variables are on a line or nearer to the line. In other words, when the changes
in the values of two correlated variables have nearly constant proportion then we can say that there

is linear correlation.

Generally, exact linear relation exists in natural sciences like Mathematics and Physics. i.e. Because
of change in one variable, the value of other variable changes in constant proportion.

e.g (1) Radius and Circumference

We know that if the radius of a circle is r units then its circumference is 27r . So, when radius is multiplied
by 2x (constant), we get its circumference. Thus, it can be said that because of change in radius, the
circumference of the circle changes in constant proportion. This is clear from the following table :

 

Radius (r) 2 3 5 10

Circumference (2zr) 4n 6n 10 20n

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) Ata constant speed, time taken by an object to travel the distance and the distance travelled by an object.
If an object is travelling at the speed of 50 km per hour then the distance travelled is in constant
proportion to the time taken to travel it. We can understand it very easily from the following table.

 

Time taken by an object to travel (hours) 2 3 6 10
Distance travelled by an object (km) 100 150 300 | 500

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

But generally in commerce, economics and social science, the changes in the values of two variables are
not in constant proportion. e.g. : If rainfall in the current year increased by 10 % for two consecutive years
as compared to the previous year then it is not necessary that yield also increases in same proportion for both
the years. This is because both the variables, rainfall and yield change under the effect of some other factors
and hence there is an element of ‘chance (uncertanity)’ in these changes. So, in such cases, the points of

ordered pairs of two correlated variables may not be on the line but they may be almost nearer to the line.

We shall study linear correlation in this chapter. Now, we shall refer linear correlation as only
‘correlation’.

There are mainly two types of correlation : (1) Positive Correlation (2) Negative Correlation

(1) Positive Correlation : When the changes in the values of two correlated variables are in
the same direction, the correlation between them is said to be positive.

The correlation between price and supply of an item, age of husband and age of wife, number of
vehicles and number of accidents on a road, sale and profit of an item, rainfall and yield of crop in
a region are some examples of positive correlation.

(2) Negative Correlation : When the changes in the values of two correlated variables are in
opposite direction, the correlation between them is said to be negative.

The correlation between price and demand of an item, expenditure and saving of a person, minimum
day temperature and sale of woollen clothes in winter, altitude and amount of Oxygen in air are some

examples of negative correlation.

 

60
Statistics : Part 1: Standard 12 Re
2.3 Correlation and Coefficient of correlation

We have already discussed the meaning and definition of correlation in the previous section. Now,
let us understand ‘correlation coefficient’ as its measure.

The measure of the strength of a linear correlation between two variables is called the correlation
coefficient. It is denoted by r. The correlation coefficient is a numerical measure of correlation which
shows the strength or degree of linear correlation between two correlated variables. This measure was

first suggested by Karl Pearson.
Methods of studying correlation

The following methods are mainly used to determine the nature and strength of correlation between
two variables :

(1) Scatter Diagram Method

(2) Karl Pearson’s Product Moment Method

(3) Spearman’s Rank Correlation Method

2.4 Scatter Diagram Method

This is a simple method of diagrammatic representation of two related variables to find the nature
of correlation. This is a most widely used method for determining the nature of correlation. Moreover,

it also gives some idea about the strength of correlation between two variables.

Suppose (4, vi), (4, y2)> (3, ¥3)> ceseeseaee ; (X, Yn) are ordered pairs of n values of two variables

X and Y. The values of variable X on X-axis and the values of variable Y on Y-axis are plotted on the
graph by taking proper scale. The graph showing the plotted points corrosponding to pairs

(x, y)> (o, Yo)> (x3, 3), coos (%ps Yn) is called a Scatter Diagram.
The pattern of points on a scatter diagram shows the nature or type of correlation and the strength

of correlation upto some extent. Now, let us see how the nature and strength of correlation between

two variables can be determined by using scatter diagram.

y If all the points of a scatter
diagram lie on one line and if the line is
going in the upward direction from left to
right then it shows perfect positive
correlation between two variables

X and Y.

We get such a scatter diagram when
the changes in the values of two variables
are in the same direction and in the constant

proportion. We take one example to under-

stand this case.

 

 

Linear Correlation
Illustration 1 : After standard deduction from total income, 20'
remaining income. The information regarding the taxab!

is given below for five persons.

‘% income tax is imposed on the

le income and the tax to be paid

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Person 1 2 3 4 5
Taxable Income (thousand 2%) x 50. 30 80 20 100
Income Tax (thousand) y 10 6 16 4 20

 

 

 

 

Draw a scatter diagram from this information and discuss about the correlation.

The following scatter diagram is obtained by plotting the points

(50, 10), (30, 6), (80, 16), (20,4) and (100,20) of x and y.

corresponding to the ordered pairs

 

y Scale : X-axis : 1 cm = % 20 thousand
Y-axis : 1 cm = % 4 thousand
0-r °
ae 6 + ®
<
=
2
cs
=
> pot
G ®
o
&
3
4 gr
| °
4+ ®
+ + + + + x
° 2 © 40 60 80 100
<— Taxable Income (thousand %) ——>

 

We can see that all the points lie on the same line in the scatter diagram. We can also see
that as the values of variable X change, the values of variable Y also change in the same direction
with a constant proportion. (Check that when the value of variable X is multiplied by 0.2 (20%),
the corresponding value of variable Y of the ordered pair is obtained. So, the changes in the two
variables X and Y are in same proportion.) Hence, we can say that there is a perfect positive correlation

between two variables X and Y.

 

62
Statistics : Part 1: Standard 12 RY
Illustration 2 :

 

If all the points of a scatter diagram lie
on one line and if the line goes in
the downward direction from left to right then it
shows perfect negative correlation between
two variables X and Y.

When the changes in the values of two
variables are in opposite direction and in the
constant proportion, we get such scatter
diagram. We take one example to understand

this case.

To know the relation between monthly expenditure and monthly savings for

middle class families, the information regarding expenditure and savings for 5 families
is given below. (The monthly income of each family is & 20,000)

 

Monthly Expenditure (thousand? ) x

15 18 8 10 12

 

Monthly Savings (thousand? ) y

 

5 2 12 10 8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Draw a scatter diagram indicating the relation between monthly expenditure and monthly
savings from this information and discuss about their correlation.

The following scatter diagram is obtained by plotting the points of ordered pairs
(15, 5), (18, 2), (8, 12), (10, 10), (12, 8) of X and Yon the graph paper.

<— Monthly Savings (thousand ®) —>

 

y Scale : X-axis : 1 cm = & 2 thousand
Y-axis : 1 cm = % 2 thousand
Rr ®
10 + °
sr °
6+
°

4+
27 °
5 +—+—++ +++ +—+ x

” 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18

 

{ 63 >
(3)

<— Monthly Expenditure (thousand?) —>

Linear Correlation
We can see that all the points on the scatter diagram, lie on the same line. We can also see that as the
values of variable X change, the values of variable Y also change in opposite direction in constant proportion.
(Check that the salary is fixed here for given five months, so the increase (or decrease) in the monthly
expenditure results in constant propotionate decrease (or increase) in the monthly savings.) So, we can say that

there is a perfect negative correlation between X and Y.

y

If all the points of scatter diagram are not on one line
but lie around a line which is going in upward direction from
left to right then it indicates that there is a partial positive
correlation between two variables X and Y.

When the changes in the values of two variables are in same
direction but not in the same proportion, we get such a scatter

