1.1 Definition and Meaning of Index Number

Price of an item, national income, supply, production, employment, unemployment, investment, import-
export, cost of living, population of a country, birth rate and death rate vary continuously with time. Generally,
the proportion and direction of these variations also keep changing. It is important to study the variations
in the price and quantity of an item with respect to change in time. The planning for the future can
be suitably done from the knowledge of these changes. The changes taking place in the values of the

variable at two different time periods can be measured by the following methods :

(1) Method of absolute measure (difference) and (2) Method of relative measure (ratio)

We will understand this concept by the following illustration :

Suppose the data regarding the average price per kilogram of two items, wheat and rice, for a month
in the year 2015 and year 2016 are as follows :

 

 

 

 

Price per kilogram %
Item
Year 2015 Year 2016
Wheat 24 30
Rice 40 46

 

 

 

 

 

Let us understand the comparision of variations in the prices of wheat and rice using the two methods
stated above.

(1) Method of Absolute Measure (difference) : The price of wheat in the year 2015 was = 24
which increased to 30 in the year 2016. Thus, the price per kilogram increased in the year 2016 by = 6
with respect to the year 2015. Similarly, the price of rice has also increased by & 6. This is obtained by the
absolute difference. Thus, it can be said that there is same rise in price in both the items. But this is not
true in reality because the prices per unit of these items are not same in the year 2015. Thus, the base for
comparative study of prices in 2016 is different. Hence, this method is not appropriate to compare the
variations in a variable. We shall now study the method of relative measure which is used in such situations.

(2) Method of Relative Measure (ratio) : A ratio of price of the commodity in the year 2016
is obtained with the price in the year 2015 in this method to find the relative changes of the price of
the item in the year 2016.

Thus, ratio of prices of wheat =

30.

24
: : : — 46 _
ratio of prices of rice = Jy = 1.15

It can be known from these ratios that the relative increase in the prices of wheat and rice in
the year 2016 is not same. The price of wheat in the year 2016 is 1.25 times the price in the year
2015, whereas the price of rice is 1.15 times its price in the year 2015. Thus, it can be said that change

in the price of wheat is more than the change in the price of rice.
The ratios of prices of wheat and rice given here indicate the changes in prices at two different
time periods. It is also called as relative change or price relative. Generally, the ratios are expressed

as percentages to facilitate comparison. Hence,

Percentage change in the price of wheat = 1.25 x 100 = 125 and

 

Percentage change in the price of rice = 1.15 x 100 = 115
(2)
Statistics : Part 1; Standard 12 VY
This is the relative percentage measure for the changes. Such a relative measure is called index number.
Thus, the percentage change in the value of a variable associated with any item for the
given (current) period compared to its value in a fixed (base) period is called an index number.

Now, we shall obtain a relative measure for the collective change in the prices of these two mutually
related items. The absolute method is not useful to find a measure for the overall change because many times
the units expressing the prices of these two items may be different and it is not possible to combine the changes
in these prices. The method of relative measure is used in such a situation. Since the relative measure is
free from the unit of measurement, it is possible to combine the changes in the prices of the two items and
it is convenient to find a mathematical measure for these changes. Now, we shall take a relative measure
for the overall change from the changes in prices of grains, wheat and rice. We shall denote the price for

the year 2016 as P: and the price of the year 2015 by Po. Po is called base year price and P, is called

the current year price. The ratio a is called the price relative of that item.

We shall present this in a tabular form :

 

 

 

 

 

Price of base Price of current Price relative Percentage of
year 2015 year 2016 or Price relative
Item
(2) (%) Relative change
Pi a
Po P = = pm * 100
Wheat 24 30 39 = 125 125
. 46 =
Rice 40 46 40 1.15 115
Total 2.40 240

 

 

 

 

 

 

The index obtained by multiplying the average of price relatives of the current year for these two items

by 100 is called the price index number of the items for the current year. It is denoted by J. Thus,

Price index number of wheat and rice _ Price relative of wheat + Price relative of rice x 100
for the current year No. of items
1.25 + 11
= LS*LIS 199
= 120

Hence, price index number of wheat and rice for the current year J = 120. The price index number
of wheat and rice J = 120 indicates that there is an overall rise of 20 percent in the prices of the two
items in the year 2016 as compared to the year 2015. Index number is a relative measure based on
ratio. Similarly, measure for the overall change can be obtained using the relative method by combining
changes in the values of more than two variables. We can define the general index number for a group
as follows.

G)

Index Number
“The average of the percentage change in the value of a variable associated with one or more items for
the given (current) period compared to its value in the fixed (base) period is called a general index number

for the group.”

=

Pri
Pr

General index number for the group J = Lm x 100

n

Where, general index number J Index number of current period with respect to comparison period

Pp, = Value of variable i for current period (i = 1,2, 3,00... ; n)
Po; = Value of variable i for comparison period (i = 1,2,3, cosy D)
n = Number of values of the variable

The simple mean is used in the definition of general index number for the group of n items. But
the weighted mean or geometric mean can also be used in the definition of general index number, which
will be discussed later in this chapter.

In practice, several mutually related items are to be included and the data regarding their prices
should be obtained to find a price index number. For example, wheat, rice, pulses, oil, ghee, jaggery, spices,
vegetables are included in the category of food items. Thus, price index number for food is an index

associated with the relative change or price relative for the prices of several related items.

Now, if we take a group of 7 such mutually related items then an index is found using relative
change in price of each item in that group. An average measure obtained from them is called the price

index numbers for the group. It can be written as the following formula :
Py
La]

General price index number I = —~%= x 100

Where, p,; = price of item i in current period (i =1,2,3.

 
 

Poi price of item i in base period (i =1,2,3

n = number of items
Further, if we take a group of n such mutually related items then an index is found using relative
change in the quantity of each item in that group. An average measure obtained from them is called
the quantity index number for the group.
Note : The index number for production, import, export, unemployment, industrial output, etc. can be

obtained by the above formula.

1.2 Characteristics of Index Number

Some of the characteristics of index number deduced from its definition are as follows :

(1) Index number is free from the unit as it is a relative measure.

(2) The changes in the values of the variable having different units can be compared using index
number. Hence, index number is a comparative measure.

(4)
Statistics : Part 1 : Standard 12 YY
(3) Index number is a relative measure showing percentage change.

(4) Index number is a special average. It has all the characteristics of an average.

(5) The situation at two different periods can be compared by ratio with the standard (base) period
using an index number.

1.3 Uses of Index Number

A general notion about the index number is, an index number is only used to find a measure for
changes in the value of a variable or the price level. But now its use is not limited to the study of
change in the price level. The index number is used in various fields in the current revolutionary age.
Index number is a useful statistical tool to study the challenges in the given economic, political, social
and industrial activities. Index number provides important guidance for planning the economic development
of a country as it gives a comparative study of economic and industrial scenario of the country. Some
of the uses of index number are as follows :

(1) Index Number for Trade : This index number provides useful guidance to study the general
situation of economic activities of business and trade in the country.

(2) Wholesale Price Index Number : This index number measures the changes in the general
price level in the country. This index number is useful to the government, producers and businessmen
to take policy decisions such as knowing the demand and supply of items in the economy, estimating
the future values and planning the future. The Reserve Bank of India uses this index number to take
necessary steps to control inflation by studying the changes in price levels. Using the wholesale price
index number, the rate of inflation is found as follows.

Wholesale index _ | Wholesale index number
number of current year of previous year

Rate of inflation = x 100

Wholesale index number of previous year

(3) Cost of Living Index Number : This index number is useful to study the changes in the
cost of living of people of different sections. This index number helps to determine purchasing power
of money, salary to employees, dearness allowance, bonus, to calculate real wage and to devise tax policies

by the government.

(4) Index Number of Human Development : This index number is useful to determine the state
of human resource, standard of living, life expectancy and level of education and it gives information
about human resource development.

(5) Index Number of National Income : This index number is useful to evaluate economic condition

of the country and to determine targets for the five year plans by the government. The suggestions for
increasing the national income, production and per capita income of the country can also be given using

this index number by studying the changes in the national income of the country.

(6) Index Number of Industrial Production : This index number is very useful to study the changes
in the production in industrial and craft fields. This index number is helpful to increase the rate of development
of the country, planning industrial and trading activities.

(7) Index Number of Agricultural Production : This index number is useful to study the changes
in the prices of agricultural production. The government plans agricultural policies using this index number.
Moreover, this index number is helpful in forming policy to give proper support price to the farmers for
their production.

C5)

Index Number
(8) Index Number of Import-Export : This index number is useful to determine import-export
policy, exchange rate, foreign exchange requirement and the rate of excise on goods and to provide necessary
suggestions.

(9) Index Number for Employment : This index number provides the picture of employment,
unemployment prevailing in the country. This shows the problems of unemployment which facilitates human
resource planning.

(10) Index Number of Capital Investment : The changes in prices of shares and stocks, debentures,
government securities and flow of capital investment can be studied by this index number. It also helps
to estimate the trend of prices of shares and stocks.

(11) Index Number of Raw Material : This index number provides necessary guidance to traders,
businessmen, economists, etc. for the policies of production-sales.

As barometer is used to predict weather, air pressure, cyclone and rain, the index number is a necessary
tool for the measurement and comparative study of changes in the economic, business and social activities

of the country. Hence, an index number is called the barometer of the economy of a country.
1.4 Base Year

In the construction of index numbers, the value of a variable for the current period is compared
with the value of the variable with a fixed period (usually from the past). This fixed period or year
is called the base year. The fixed year from the past can be the preceding year or any year before
that. The period or year for which the value is to be compared with the base period or year is called
the current period or year. For example, if the price of an item in the year 2016 is to be compared
with the price of the same item in the year 2015, the year 2015 is called base year and the year 2016
is called the current year.

The year selected as base year should be standard or normal. It should be free from natural calamities
like floods, draught, earthquake, abnormal man-made events like war, revolt, riot, strike, agitation, political
events, economic disturbance or any unusual events. It is also necessary that the base year should not
be from a distant past. If the base year selected is an unusual year and the values of the variable are
unusually high or low then the value of index number could be misleading and it will not reveal the realistic
picture of the current situation. Thus, the base year should be carefully selected while constructing index

number.

The base year can be selected in two ways : (1) Fixed Base Method (2) Chain Base Method
1.4.1 Fixed Base Method

In this method, a stable period or year with usual events or situation is selected as a normal year
or base year. But sometimes it becomes difficult to select a normal or base year. In this case, an average
value of certain years is taken as the value of the variable for the base year. Index number is obtained
by comparing value of the variable in the current year with the value of variable for the base year.
The base year should be changed periodically so that it does not become a year of the distant past.
The index number by fixed base method is obtained from the following formula :

(6)
Ne

 

Statistics : Part 1: Standard 12
Value of the variable in current year (period)

Index number I= yi. of the variable in base year (period) * 100

PL
po * 100

Where, p, = Value of the variable in current year (period)

Po = Value of the variable in base year (period)
Illustration 1 : The data about wholesale prices of wheat in a region are as follows. Taking the year
2005 as the base year, prepare the index numbers for the price of the item for the remaining
years. State the percentage increase in the price of wheat in the year 2013 from these index

 

 

numbers.
Year 2005 | 2006 | 2007 | 2008 | 2009 | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 | 2013
Price per
1650 | 1690 | 1730 | 1750 | 1810 | 1850 | 1870 | 1900 | 1950
Quintal (%)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

We will find the fixed base index number as the year 2005 is to be taken as the base year. The
index number for the price of wheat in the year 2005 will be taken as 100.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
