Analysis of Financial Statements

 

 

 

 

1. Introduction 9. Users of Financial Analysis
2. Meaning of Financial Statements 10. Limitations of Analysis of Financial Statements
3. Objectives and Types of Financial 11. Significance of Comparative Financial
Statements Statements
4. Significance of Financial Statements 12. Stages of Analysis of Financial Statements
5. Meaning of Financial Analysis 13. Tools of Analysis of Financial Statements
6. Types of Financial Analysis 14. Comparative statements
7. Objectives of Financial Analysis 15. Common Size statements
8. Uses of Financial Analysis — Exercise
1. Introduction

Business and non-business enterprise undertakes financial transactions. These financial transactions
are recorded as per rules and principles of accounting. These financial transactions pass through
different stages of accounting. The commencement of these stages is from journal entry. At the end of
these stages, final accounts are prepared. We have undertaken that study in 11th standard in this
regard. In previous chapter we have studied final accounts of company. The components of final accounts
are trading account, profit and loss account (which is also known as income statement) and
balance sheet. These three are financial statements. Besides, cash flow statement, fund flow statement
are included in financial statements. These financial statements disclose the results of financial
transactions of particular period of time. e.g. What is the amount of gross profit ? What is the amount of
net profit ? What is the amount of non-current liability ? This kind of information can be ascertained
from them. Financial statements represent historical information. These financial statements represent
results of financial transactions of accounting period. In brief, profit and loss account discloses result
of business enterprise and balance sheet discloses financial status of the business. Cash flow statement
related discussion is undertaken in subsequent chapter. (Cash flow statement also discloses the result of
difference between cash inflow and cash outflow of financial activities of the business.)

Financial statements disclose what is the result of business; but do not disclose why this result ?
Factors responsible to such result can not be ascertained. What type of relationship is there between
different components of financial statements also can not be asertained from financial statements.
(However, the objectives of financial statements are pre determined and for respective objectives
financial statements are prepared.) E.g. sale of a company is = 80,000. Closing stock is ¥ 20,000. Opening
stock is = 10,000. Purchase is = 50,000, consequently gross profit of the company will be = 40,000. The

computation is shown on page no. 154 :

 

153
Analysis of Financial Statements
Trading Account

 

 

 

 

Dr Cr
Particulars Ant. (%) Particulars Amt. (%)
To Opening stock 10,000 | By Sales 80,000
To Purchase 50,000 | By Closing stock 20,000
To Gross profit 40,000
1,00,000 1,00,000

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Here, gross profit is the result of purcahse-sales transactions. Trading account discloses information

about result of = 40,000.
These transactions can be represented in the following form. The information presented in this

form, can be interpreted. The process of interpretation and analysis is given below.

 

 

 

Particulars (=)

Sales 80,000
Less : Cost of goods sold

Opening stock 10,000

+ Purchase 50,000

60,000 |
— Closing stock 20,000 40,000
Gross profit 40,000

 

 

 

 

 

Here, (i) There is a profit of = 40,000 because goods of € 40,000 are sold for = 80,000. = 40,000
is result. But the factors of this result creation are sales, closing stock, purchase and opening stock.
Even a small change in one factor leads to the change in result. e.g. in above mentioned problem if
the value of closing stock is ¥ 24,000 instead of = 20,000, the cost of goods sold will be = 36,000 instead
of = 40,000. Consequently gross profit will be ¥ 44,000 instead of = 40,000. So through analysis the
information pertaining to affecting factors is asertainable.

(ii) The creation of gross profit is from sales. Therefore, the proportion of gross profit to sales
40,000 Gross profit
80,000 Sales

Gross profit has relation with sales. The gross profit increases due to the increase in sales if other
factors remain constant. Hence, quantum of gross profit would increase. In case of above mentioned

will be x 100 = 50 %.

illustration if sales is ¥ 1,00,000 and there is no change in other factors i.e. cost of goods sold remains
% 40,000, this will give gross profit of ¥ 60,000. So, there is direct effect of change in sales on gross
profit. This kind of information can be availed through analysis.
How the gross profit of = 40,000 is earned ? What is the proportion of gross profit to sales ?
This is ascertained through the interpretation of information disclosed in financial statements or by
presenting the results in a different manner. This process of interpretation is known as an analysis.
Thus, the interpretation of the information or result given in financial statements is known as analysis.

154

 

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
e Analysis of financial statements :

Which tools are used ?

Which procedure is used for analysis ?

To whom, is it useful ?

What are its objectives ?

Answers pertaining to these questions are to be studied in this chapter.

In the previous chapter we have studied the financial statements of company. In the 11th standard
also the study of entities is done in chapter 5 of part 2. So we do not discuss it again here.

The information in the content of financial statements analysis is as follows :

2. Meaning of Financial Statements

Business or non-business entities maintain their accounts. For preparation of these accounts,
tules, principles, traditions and assumptions of accounting are considered.

Financial statements are those statements which provide the results of different financial
aspects of the entity .

Financial statements are an organised report which disclose detailed financial condition of the
business entity .

3. Objectives and Types of Financial Statements
e Objectives

Different financial statements are prepared under the accounting system. Every financial statement
has its own, independent existence and use. Financial statements like income statement, balance sheet
and cash flow statements are prepared. (There are some other financial statements also, that are not
included in syllabus). Each financial statement is prepared with specific purpose. It's explanation in
brief is as follows :

(1) To know the profit or loss of the business entity : Business entity undertakes revenue
activities through out the year. These activities are of two types. Receipt and Payment. If receipts are
more than payments, difference is known as profit. If payments are more than receipts, difference it is
known as loss. The information for such profit or loss is available from the prescribed financial statement.
This statement is called as income statement. Therefore the first objective of the financial statement
is to ascertain the profit or loss of the business.

(2) To know the financial position of the business entity : The financial position of the business
entity is determined on the basis of difference of assets and liabilities. When the value of assets are more
than liabilities, it is called as good financial positoin. When the value of assets is less than liabilities it is
called as weak financial position. This information is available from the prescribed statement. Which is
known as balance sheet. The second objective of preparation of financial statements is to know financial
position.

(3) To know the cash position of the business entity : The business undertakes transactions
of cash receipt and payment during the year. The information about different sources of cash and
application of cash is available from the prescribed statement. This statement is known as cash flow

statement. The third objective of preparing the financial statement is to know cash inflow and outflow
of the business.

 

155
Analysis of Financial Statements
In brief,

 

 

 

Sr. Financial Statement Objective

(1) | Income statement To know the profit or loss of any specific period of the business
(Profit and loss account) entity, this statement is prepared.

(2) | Balance sheet To know the financial position on a specific day of the business,

this statement is prepared.

 

(3) | Cash flow statement To know the cash inflow and outflow of any specific period of

 

 

 

 

the business entity, this statement is prepared.

 

4. Significance of Financial Statements

The information disclosed in the financial statements is useful to the existing and potential
stakeholders. The financial statements are prepared to satisfy the different types of requirements of
managment, existing and potential investors, fund providers, short-term creditors, employees, customers,
governments and other different agencies. The financial statements are important for these stakeholders
but the analysis of financial statements accelarates the significance of these statements.
5. Meaning of Financial Analysis

The objectives of preparing the financial statements are predetermined. Financial statements
represent information and results. But "after preparation of financial statements, they are rearranged
in such a way that they become comparable. The different stakeholders take their decisions on the
basis of financial statements, which are prepared in a comparable form". This entire process is known
as analysis.
6. Types of Financial Analysis

Financial analysis is done for internal and external purpose. This can be done in the horizontal
form, vertical form, for short-term and for long-term. Discussion pertaining to this is as follows :

We can present different types of financial analysis :

(1) On the basis of stakeholders : (i) External analysis
(ii) Internal analysis
(i) Horizontal analysis
(ii
(
(

(2) Horizontal-vertical form :

Vertical analysis

(3) On the basis of duration : i) Long-term analysis
ii) Short-term analysis

(1) On the Basis of Stakeholders : Financial statements of a business entity are used by
various stakeholders. These stakeholders can be categorised into two categories : (i) External party
(ii) Internal party.

(i) External analysis : When published accounts like income statement, balance sheet, report of
an auditor or directors are analysed by external parties like potential investors, financial institutions,
government agencies, credit rating agencies, researchers etc for their investment related decision or

for any other decision, it is known as external analysis.

156

 

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
(ii) Internal analysis : The management of the business take their decision from accounts

prepared by them. The base of these decisions is analysis. When financial statements are analysed by

the management for their decisions is known as internal analysis. The information available for this
kind of analysis is accurate and elaborate.

(2) Horizontal or Vertical Form : This kind of analysis can be done in two ways : (i) In the
horizontal form and (ii) In the vertical form.

(i) Horizontal analysis : Financial statements are prepared every year. The comparison of
financial statements of different years is known as horizontal analysis. This analysis is done for long

term planning. This analysis is useful to know the current trend. This analysis is known as time

series analysis.

 

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

 

 

 

 

 

Statement of ( Statement of cash flow

Statement of Balance sheet,
income, a

profit and loss.

 

 

 

t Tt rt tht

At ya

> B

 

 

Base year

From the figure above under A type analysis year 2013 can be compared with 2014 and year
2014 with 2015. i.e. performance of each current year can be compared with its previous year.

In the same manner under B type analysis, the year 2013 is treated as base year and the
performance of each subsequent year is comparable with the base year 2013.

Both the above mentioned types of analysis are horizontal analysis. e.g. As compared to
2013 whether the profit of 2014 is increased or decreased ? Whether assets are increased or
decreased ? This kind of trend can also be checked. The comparison of the statement of one year with
the others known as horizontal analysis.

(ii) Vertical analysis : This kind of analysis is used to compare financial statements of one year.
This analysis is used to compare the performance of different uints or departments of one year with
the help of different pre determined ratios.

Financial statements of different units for the year 2017 :

 

 

Statement of income
Balance sheet

L

Statement of cash flow

 

Statement of income
Balance sheet

L

Statement of cash flow

 

 

 

Statement of income
Balance sheet

L

Statement of cash flow

 

 

Company X

Company Y

Company Z

The comparative analysis for one year among different units of different financial statements
can be called as vertical analysis.
157

 

Analysis of Financial Statements
(3) On the Basis of Duration : One significant concept of accounting is Going Concern. As per
this concept the existence of business entity is permanent. While preparing the accounts the concept
of periodicity is also considered. It is generally of 12 months. We have acquired information about
this in 11th standard, chapter no. 6 of part II. The analysis of accounts of business can be done for
short-term and long-term. It's explanation is as follows :

(i) Long-term analysis : Many stakeholders like debenture holders, financial institutions, potential
investors undertake long-term analysis of financial statements before investing their funds in the
corporate form of business. For this analysis information of more than one year is needed. Under this
analysis, these stakeholders determine the present and future long-term solvency, profitability,
liquidity and efficiency of the borrowers. In brief, under long-term analysis the evaluation of above
mentioned dimensions is done with the help of financial statements of more than one year.

(ii) Short-term analysis : This kind of analysis is used to measure short-term solvency or
liquidity of the business entity. This kind of analysis is done by the short-term lenders as well as the
suppliers of row materials.

As discussed above, the analysis of financial statements is done in different ways for different
purposes. For analysis of financial statements, financial statements of one year or more than one years are
considered. On the basis of analysis, different stakeholders make their rational decisions. Now, we will

study the objectives of financial statements analysis.
7. Objectives of Financial Analysis

Financial analysis has different objectives for different stakeholders. Important objectives of
financial analysis are as follows :

(1) Evaluation of Earning Capacity : Generally, financial statements are prepared for the
duration of 12 months. What is the earning capacity of entity during this period ? This analysis is made
with the help of different accounting ratios. Besides this, the future earning capacity of the entity also
can be forecasted. Mostly all stakeholders for thier investment decisions, gather information of

present and future earning through analysis.

(2) Efficiency Evaluation : Business entity acquires different assets as per the nature of
business. With the help of this assets production and sales are done and services are provided. The use
of these assets should be at maximum level. Maximum use of assets, generate more earning. Through
financial analysis, the evaluation of the efficient use of assets can be done.

(3) Solvency Evaluation : Solvency of the entity is categorised into two types, which we have
studied in 11th standard : Short-term solvency and long-term solvency. Different parties provide
goods and services to business entities on credit. The payment of these goods and services is to be
made in short-term period. Therefore the providers of goods and services measure the short-term
solvency of the business. Financial institutions and banks also provide long-term advances to the
business entities. They undertake evaluation and forecast of long-term solvency of business entities.
Through financial analysis evaluation of short-term and long-term solvency of that business can

be done.

 

158
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
(4) Evaluation of Managerial Efficiency : The owners and the management are two different
entities in the company form of business. Funds of shareholders are managed by the board of directors.
Besides, officers excute the decisions taken by the board of directors. Therefore, through financial
analysis evaluation of effectiveness and fairness of the decisions of the board of directors can be
done. The performance evaluation of the officers can also be done through this analysis.

(5) Planning for Budget : Budget means the quantitative planning or statistical planning
of future objectives in present. What will be the future sales ? How much purchase is required ?
How much will be the production ? Howmuch cash will be required ? What will be the revenue
expenses ? What will be the capital expenses ? etc. are estimated. Analysis of financial statement is
useful to make the process of budget effective.

(6) Comparative Study : Two types of comparisons can be done through financial analysis. In the
first comparison, the business entity can compare its current accounts with the accounts of past. Different
aspects of business entity like profitability, liquidity, solvency and efficiency etc. of the current year can be
compared with the previous years to know the growth of the above mentioned aspects. In the second
comparison all these aspects of business entity are compared with the results of competitors. This is
known as interfirm comparison. Whether business entity is strong or weak as compared to its

competitors can be ascertained through financial statement analysis.

(7) Simplicity to Understand Accounts : Financial accounts are prepared on the basis of
determined rules, principles and terminology. It is possible that all the users of financial accounts may not
have full knowledge pertaining to financial accounts. Under these circumstances, financial statements
analysis helps to understand the financial accounts. In financial analysis the presentation of financial
accounts is done in various ways. It provides simplicity to the users to understand financial accounts.
Therefore, they can make their investments and other decisions. In brief, the financial analysis assists
to understand the financial accounts.

Due to the analysis of financial statements different objectives can be achieved. These objectives

explain the significance of the analysis of financial statements.

8. Uses of Financial Analysis
Generally four different aspects are analysed from the analysis of financial statements :
(1) Analysis of profitability : This discloses the earning capacity of business entity.
(2) Analysis of liquidity : This discloses the short-term solvency of business entity.
(3) Analysis of solvency : This discloses the long-term solvency of business entity.
(4) Analysis of efficiency : This explains the degree of use of assets.

(The discussion in detail about this is done in next chapter of ratio analysis.)

From the above studied objectives different stakeholders make their different decisions, that can be
described in brief, as under :

(1) For Dividend Decision : In the company form dividend decision is analysed by different
stakeholders - like existing investors, potential investors and company itself. What amount of dividend
can be paid is decided by the management of the company. What amount of dividend will be
received is estimated by the investors. The dividend decision is determined through profitability analysis.

159

 

Analysis of Financial Statements
The payment of dividend is based on earning capacity. This can be decided by profitability analysis. For
dividend payment decision, financial statement analysis is useful.

(2) For Investment Decision : Investors invest their funds in a company for two purposes :
(i) To receive regular income of dividend or interest (ii) For capital appreciation. The information
pertaining to both the purposes can be availed from profitability and solvency analysis respectively.
Thus, investors use this analysis for their decisions.

(3) For Lending Decision : Short-term and long-term loan and advances are provided to the
bueinsss entities by banks and financial institutions. To know how far their advances are safe, the
analysis for examination of short-term and long-term solvency is useful.

(4) For Borrowing Decision : This decision is useful to the business entity itself. From their
analysis of financial statements, business entity can estimate its own borrowing capacity to borrow
funds from the market. On the basis of this evaluation, the opportunities for new investment can be
explored.

9. Users of Financial Analysis

The information disclosed in the financials statements can be used directly by the stakeholders. But
after having analysis of financial statements, the information of financial statements become more precise
and understandable. Therefore, all the stakeholders can take their appropriate decisions. This analysis is :

a For internal purpose

aq For external users

aq For short-term decisions

a For long-term decisions

a For existing investors

a For potential investors
10. Limitations of Analysis of Financial Statements

The analysis of financial statements is done in various ways. This is useful to different parties.
Different stakeholders acquire appropriate information about good and weak aspects of business
entity, through this analysis. However, there are some limitations of financial statement analysis.
Thus, as and when financial statement analysis is undertaken, the following limitations should also
be considered.

(1) Historical Data : Financial accounts are prepared on the basis of past transactions. Thus,
financial accounts are known as historical accounts. The analysis of financial statements is based on
historical information. From this analysis the future can be forecasted. The shareholders and other
parties are more concerned with the future of business entity. Which cannot be availed from this
analysis but the estimation of future can be made.

(2) Ignorance of Inflation : Due to inflation information disclosed in financial statement does
not represent the real status. Specifically, at the time of the valuation of assets the impact of inflation is
ignored in financial statements. Assets are disclosed at their old value and replacement cost which is

higher is not considered. Income statement is prepared at current prices and balance sheet discloses

160

 

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
actual prices of past. Thus, one statement is prepared as per current price and other financial statement
is prepared as per the historical price. In brief the value of money is not considered comprehensively.

Therefore the result as per financial statement analysis might fail to provide guidance.

(3) Absence of Qualitative Aspect : During financial statement analysis only quantifiable items
are considered. But factors like contribution of workers for development of business and loyality of
management towards business entity, honesty, expertise etc. are not considered. All these factors have
relation with efficiency of business. But these are ignored. This can also be considered as a limitation

of financial statements analysis.

(4) Based on Presentation of Financial Statements : The operation of analysis is done on the
basis of information provided in financial statements. The correct and fair analysis and interpretation
are entirely based on information disclosed in the financial statement. There is a direct relation between
true and fair information and effective and efficient analysis. Thus, if information of financial
statements is incorrect or inadequate, the true and fair analysis of information can not be done. Here,
the financial analysis is a dependent variable, which is based on the appropriateness of financial

statements.

(5) Personal Opinion : There are options in accounting for preparing the accounts. e.g. use of
depreciation method, inventory valuation method. Thus there is a possibility of personal opinion. Due to
these options there is a room for subjectivity in preparation of accounts. This also creates hurdle for
financial analysis. Thus it can be considered as a limitation.

(6) Window Dressing : As stated earlier fair financial analysis is based on the truthfulness of the
financial statements. Many a times, the information disclosed in financial statements is not found to
be correct. Accounts are prepared on the basis of incorrect information rather than correct information.
Thus, decisions made by the stakeholders stand incorrect. This is also a limitation of financial
analysis.

(7) Discloses only Symptoms of Problem : Financial analysis provides information of causes of
the problems but does not provide the solution of it. For examle, if company has expected 30 % of gross
profit and company earns 20 % gross profit, the reduced gross profit rate can be seen through financial
statement analysis. But why gross profit is reduced can not be ascertained. The management has to find
out the solutions and has to frame strategy accordingly.

From the above discussion it is concluded that the limitations of financial analysis are the result
of limitations of financial statements. If the limitations of financial statements are eliminated, the
limitations of financial analysis will be removed automatically.

11. Significance of Comparative Financial Statements

As stated earlier, financial statements are prepared on the basis of the principles and rules of
accounting, and in the pre determined form. So that the financial accounts represent results with
consistence base. To understand accounts easily by the stakeholders, financial statements are presented
in rearranged form. Due to this process, the utility of financial statements increases. The importance of

comparative statements can be described as under :

 

161
Analysis of Financial Statements
(1) Intrafirm Comparison : Every year financial statements are prepared by business enterprises.
When the accounts of business entity of current year are compared with the accounts of previous years,
it is known as intrafirm comparison. As compared to previous year whether the efficiency is increased
or not ? Profitability is increased or not ? Whether the solvency is increased or not ? can be analysed.
Besides, when one business entity has various departments, their financial performance evaluation is also
done. This is also included in the category of intrafirm comparison.

(2) Interfirm Comparison : An industry comprises of various business entities. When
financial statements of various business entities are compared with each other, it is known as interfirm
comparison. Which business unit is financially strong or weak as compared to the other business unit
can be ascertained. This information is ascertained through interfirm comparison. Different stakeholders
may rethink on their investment decisions due to the interfirm comparison. So to undertake the financial

condition comparison between two units, financial statements analysis is useful.

(3) Indicates Trend : Due to comparison of financial statements of different years and different
sections of a business unit, the information of trend pertaining to financial position and profitability is
ascertained. On the basis of this trend, different stakeholders undertake forecasting of their decisions.
The trend of different aspects is disclosed by financial statements analysis. The trend helps to make
decisions.

(4) Useful to Creditors : Creditors of business units are of long-term and short-term. Creditors
determine creditworthiness of business units through analysis of financial statements. So it is also useful to
the creditors.

(5) Simple and Comparable Presentation of Information: The information disclosed in
the financial statements is prepared on the basis of rules of accounting. But when the information of the
financial statements is rearranged it becomes simple to understand and analyse the financial statements.
Generally, the information of financial statements is rearranged in the form of table. Thus, it becomes
useful and simple to understand.

12. Stages of Analysis of Financial Statements

There are legal rules for the preparation of financial statements. Financial statements are prepared
on the basis of rules. In the company form, financial accounts are prepared as per Companies Act, 2013.
There is a provision for structure and nature of financial statements. Different stages are developed for
the analysis of financial statements. Due to these stages an organised and scientific analysis can be done.
These stages are as under :

(1) New Structural Arrangement of Financial Statements : Different tools are used for the
analysis of financial statements which are prepared as per the legal provisions. Where common size
financial statements, comparative statements, ratio analysis etc. are included. The information disclosed
in financial statements is reclassified and rearranged to undertake use of these tools. This arrangement
makes use of tools more favourable. e.g. to know the trend of net profit of last five years, the net

Net profit
Sales

profit rate is used. It's formula is x 100.

For this analysis sales and profit of last five years is arranged in the form of table, which is as

follows :

 

162
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
Table of Net Profit Rate

 

 

 

 

 

Year Net Profit (=) Sales (=) Net Profit Rate (%)
1 60,000 5,00,000 12 %
2 77,000 5,50,000 14 %
3 1,10,500 8,50,000 13 %
4 80,000 5,00,000 16 %
5 84,000 5,60,000 15 %
Total 4,11,500 29,60,000
+ Years 5 5
=Average| 82,300 5,92,000 14 %

 

 

 

 

 

 

In the first stage of analysis, required information is to be obtained from the financial statement
and subsequently to be reclassified and rearranged as mentioned above. To know the trend of
net profits of the last five years, this information can be presented in this form.

(2) Comparison : In the second stage of financial analysis, reclassified and rearranged information
is compared. The sales and net profit which are shown in above mentioned table, are compared with
sales and net profit of its previous year i.e. the comparison of the results of the second year with the
first year. Profit, sales and net profit rate are increased as compared to the first year in the second year.
In this way, the results of the second year with the third year, of the third year with the fourth year and
of the fourth year with the fifth can be compared. Analysis and interpretation is done on the basis of
comparison.

(3) Analysis and Interpretation : Under point no. (2), the information is compared. Under this
stage an attempt is made to explain information in quantitative manner along with quantitative form.
Analysis means appropriate examination or evaluation of information, where information is categorised
into different components and their relationship is tested. Interpretation gives explanation of this
relationship. Net profit and sales shown in the above table are the components of the financial statements
(income statement). There are two variables for computation of net profit rate and both are
interrelated. Theoretically, the increase in sales leads to the increase in net profit. It means the sales and
the net profit has positive relationship. As compared to the first year sales is increased from = 5,00,000
to = 5,50,000 in the second year and the profit is also increased from % 60,000 to = 77,000. In the third
year, sales is increased - profit is also increased. In the fourth year sale is reduced - profit is also
reduced. Again in the fifth year sales is increased, profit is also increased. (In practice it is possible that
inspite of having increase in sales, there may be reduction in profit; or despite the decrease in sales the
profit increases). This process is known as analysis.

As compared to the first year, net profit rate of second year is increased from 12 % to 14 %.
It is good for the company. But in the third year sales is increased as compared to the second year;
profit is also increased, but rate of net profit is reduced, which is 13 %. It can be said that profit earning
capacity of the company is reduced during the third year as compared the second year. From the
information of five years the total sales of five years is = 29,60,000 and profit is ¥ 4,11,500. Their average
respectively is = 5,92,000 and % 82,300. This is a kind of interpretation. In this way, the interpretation
can be done each year. This process is known as interpretation.

163

 

Analysis of Financial Statements
Performance evaluation of a company is done on the basis of analysis and interpretation. From
this evaluation it can be ascertained that whether company has good financial health or not. Different
stakeholders make their decisions on the basis of this analysis and interpretation.

Now, let us take information on different tools of financial statement analysis where study
pertaining to common size financial statements, comparative statements and ratio analysis is to be done.

13. Tools of Analysis of Financial Statements

The preparation of financial statements is the last stage under the financial accounting. In this
stage the preparation of income statement and balance sheet are included. In the company form cash flow
statement is also prepared. In these statement details of expense, income, assets, liability are disclosed in
the form of rupees (In the form of currency of respective country). All these details are shown in the
financial statements in legal form. Many a times it is difficult for a common man to understand them. In
order to resolve this problem and to make information of financial statements more understandable the
analysis of statement is done. For this analysis information of more than one years is used. For this
process, different tools are developed in accounting; and analysis process is done with the use of
them. Where common size financial statements, comparative statements and ratio analysis are included
(Ratio analysis is disccussed in separate chapter). The explanation of comparative statements and
common size statements is as follows :

Comparison of Financial Statements : The financial information of atleast two years is
required. for comparison process. The development details of predetermined period is obtained through
comparison. It can be known that which period shows good results and which shows weak results.

In comparative statements the details of income statements and/or balance sheets of two or
more than two years are compared.

Comparison of Financial Statements

J
