EXERCISE
1. Select appropriate alternative for each question :

(1) Debit balance of profit and loss account shown in the balance sheet at the time of retirement

of a partner is ........... :

a recorded on the debit side of all partners’ capital accounts includin: ie retirin;

(a) ‘ded he debit side of all p ' capital including th iring
partner in their old profit-loss sharing ratio
recorded on the credit side of all partners’ capital accounts including the retirin;

(b) ded he dit side of all p ' capital including th iring
partner in their old profit-loss sharing ratio

(c) credit side of the retiring partners' capital account only

(d) debit side of the remaining partners' capital accounts in their gaining ratio

(2) Goodwill shown in the balance sheet at the time of the retirement of a partner is recorded

AS eseeeee

(a) shown in new balance sheet, if decided by partners

(b) debit side of all partners' capital accounts in their old profit-loss sharing ratio
(c) credit side of all partners' capital accounts in their old profit-loss sharing ratio

(d) debit side of reriting partners’ capital account only
(3) Goodwill payable to the retiring partner is recorded as ...........+ :
(a) credit side of all partners' capital accounts, in their old profit-loss sharing ratio
Pi iP) Pp Ss
(b) credit side of all partners’ capital accounts, in their gaining ratio
(c) debit side of continuing partners’ capital accounts, in their gaining ratio
(d) debit side of continuing partners' capital accounts, in their new profit-loss sharing ratio
8 Pi P' Pp iS

(4) When only old profit-loss sharing ratio is given, gaining ratio of remaining partners will

 

be

(a) (b) — old ratio

(c) capital ratio (d) can not be calculated
262

 

Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

A partner, except the retiring partner also receives goodwill when ............. :

(a) his capital is more

(b) new share in new profit-loss sharing ratio is more than his old share

(c) new share in new profit-loss sharing ratio is less than his old share

(d) new share and old share are equal

Loss of revaluation account at the time of retirement or death is recorded in ...........

account in .. ratio ON ww... side of the capital accounts.

 

(a) remaining partners, new profit-loss sharing, debit
(b) all partners, old profit-loss sharing, credit

(c) all partners, old profit-loss sharing, debit

(d) all partners, equal proportion, debit

If partnership deed is silent, interest is payable at ........... on unpaid amount payable to the
retiring partner.

(a) 10 % pa. (b) 12 % pa.

(c) 6 % pa. (d) zero

Accounting year ends on 31-3-2016. A partner dies on 30-6-2016. Deceased partners’ share

in profit is i. Profit share payable to the partner is to be calculated on the basis of last

year's profit € 24,000. .......... amount will be paid as share in profit at the time of death.
(a) = 8000 (b) = 24,000
(c) & 1333 (d) % 2000

Sweta, Geeta and Jyoti are equal partners. Gita retires. Gita's share is gained by Sweta
and Jyoti equally. New profit and loss sharing ratio of Sweta and Jyoti will be .

 

(a) 3:1 (bo) 2:1

(c) 1:2 (d) 1:1

Workmen profit sharing fund is recorded as ............. at the time of the retirement of
a partner.

(a) a liability in new balance sheet

(b) credited to all partners’ capital account in their old profit-loss sharing ratio
(c) debited to all partners’ capital account in their old profit-loss sharing ratio
(d) credited to the retiring partners' capital account

Answer following questions in one sentence :

(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)

State the circumstances of the retirement of a partner.

Which important accounting aspects are considered at the time of the retirement or death of
a partner ?

Which balances are credited to all partners’ capital accounts in their old profit-loss sharing
ratio ?

Which balances are debited to all partners’ capital accounts in their old profit-loss sharing
ratio ?

Explain accounting treatment of old goodwill appearing in the balance sheet of the firm at
the time of the retirement of a partner.

 

263
Retirement / Death of a Partner
(6)

Explain accounting treatment of the new goodwill of the firm valued at the time of the
