Company Final Accounts

 

 

 

 

1. Introduction 6. Form of Balance Sheet and General
2. Meaning of Financial Statements Instructions
3. Financial Year 7. Form of Statement of Profit and Loss and
4. Characteristics of Financial Statements General Instructions
5. Objectives of Preparation of Financial — Exercise
Statements
1. Introduction

Financial statements of a company are of atmost importance for its shareholders, tax authorities,
analysts, management and other stackeholders. They give information about financial performance and
position of a company. Section 129(1) of the Companies Act, 2013 lays down that the financial
statements shall give a true and fair view of the statement of affairs of the company or companies.
They should also comply with the accounting standards notified under section 133 and shall be in the
form or forms as may be provided for different class or classes of companies in schedule III. Items
contained in such financial statements shall be in accordance with the accounting standards. Section 129(1)
also provides that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any insurance or banking company
or any company engaged in the generation or supply of electricity or to any other class of company for
which a form of financial statement has been specified in or under the act governing such class of
company.

In this chapter, we shall discuss about preparation of balance sheet and statement of profit
and loss of company as per Companies Act, 2013.

2. Meaning of Financial Statements

Financial statements are statements presenting accounting information in brief at the end of
accounting process for an accounting period. Financial statements provide information regarding
financial results to its internal and external users.

As per section 2(40) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Financial statement" in relation to company
includes —

(i) A balance sheet as at the end of the financial year

(ii) A profit and loss account or in case of a entity carrying on any activity not for profit,

an income and expenditure account for the financial year

(iii) Cash flow statement for the financial year

(iv) A statement of changes in equity, if applicable

(v) Notes related to the accounts
It should be noted that balance sheet shows the financial position as at a particular point of time

and hence its title should be "Balance Sheet as at .........". Profit and loss statement shows financial

 

performance for the period ended on a particular date which is usually a year end hence its title should
116

 

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
be "Profit and Loss Statement for the Year Ended ....... ". If profit and loss account is prepared for any
period, shorter or longer than a year, the word "Period" issued. For example, a company is incorporated on
1st October, 2016 and its first profit and loss statement is prepared for 6 months upto 31-3-2017. In
this case the title should be "Profit and Loss Statement for Period Ended 31-3-2017" or "Profit and

Loss Statement for Six Months Ended 31-3-2017".
3. Financial Year

According to section 2(41) of the Companies Act, 2013, "Financial year" in relation to any
company or body corporate, means the period ending on the 31st March of every year. If company
is incorporated on or after the Ist day of January of a year, the financial period ends on the 31st day of
March of the following year. Generally financial year is of 12 months for the period starting from Ist
April and ending on 31st March.

4. Characteristics of Financial Statements

Following are some of the characteristics of financial statements :

(1) Financial statements are called historical statements as they are related to past period.

(2) Figures stated in financial statements are expressed in terms of money.

(3) Financial statements are based on recorded facts and do not include even significant facts
which are not recorded in the books. For example, self generated goodwill of the company
is not recorded as no cost is incurred for acquisition thereof.

(4) Profit and Loss Account shows profit or loss for a given period and thus gives idea about
the financial performance of a company.

(5) Balance sheet shows position of equity, liabilities and assets as at a particular point in time,
thus gives an idea about the financial position of a company.

(6) Financial statements are prepared based on generally accepted accounting principles.

(7) Preparation of financial statement involves personal judgement in respect of some items
where options are available under law for different treatments. For example, the person
preparing accounts is free to select any alternative out of alternatives available for method

of valuation of inventory and method of providing depreciation.

5. Objectives of Preparing Financial Statements

Following are some of the objectives of preparation of financial statements :

(1) To know about true and fair view of financial performance of a company.

(2) To know the true and fair view of financial position of a company.

(3) To comply with legal requirements.

(4) To communicate financial information of the company to various interested parties.
6. Form of Balance Sheet and General Instructions

Part I of schedule III to the Companies Act, 2013 gives form of Balance sheet. Balance sheet
of a company must be prepared as per this format. Schedule III gives only vertical format. The format
of balance sheet is given on page no. 118.

117

 

Company Final Accounts
Balance Sheet

 

Name of the COMpaNY ...........seeccesssseceesseeeeeseeeeesseeeees
Balance Sheet as at : ............
Particulars Note Figures as Figures as
No. at the end at the end
of current of previous
year year

(%) (%)
(1) (2) (3) (4)

 

I Equity and Liabilities :
(1) Shareholders' funds :
(a) Share capital
(b) Reserves and surplus
(c) Money received against share warrants
(2) Share Application Money Pending Allotment
(3) Non-current Liabilities
(a) Long term borrowings
(b) Deferred tax liabilities (net)
(c) Other long term liabilities
(d) Long-term provisions
(4) Current Liabilities
(a) Short-term borrowings
(b)
(c) Other current liabilities
(4)

Trade payables

Short-term provisions

 

Total

 

 

II Assets
(1) Non-current Assets :
(a) Fixed assets
(i) Tangible assets
(ii) Intangible assets
(iii) Capital work in progress
(iv) Intangible assets under development

Non-current investments

eo

Deferred tax assets (net)

ee

Long-term loans and advances

 

 

 

 

Other non-current assets

 

 

 

118
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
 

(2) Current Assets :
(a) Current investments
(b) Inventories
(c) Trade receivables
(d) Cash and cash equivalents
(e) Short-term loans and advances
(f) Other current assets
Total

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Note : There are four columns in vertical profit and loss account of a company. Balance sheet has
two main headings : (i) Equity and Liabilities (ii) Assets. Equity and liabilities and assets and their sub
heads are shown in first column of particulars. Every head has subheads. Subheads also comprise of
various items. The size of balance sheet becomes abnormal if all items are shown at one place. Therefore
subheads are shown under main head. Notes to the accounts are prepared for every number
shown against subhead to show various items of each such subhead. Which is explained later on. Third
column shows figures for current year and figures for previous year are shown in fourth column, so
that the figures of two years can be compared by a person who wants to study financial statements.
Statements of profit and loss is prepared in the same manner by preparing same columns.

e General Instructions for Preparation of Balance Sheet :

(1) An asset shall be classified as current if it satisfies any of the following criteria :
(a) When it is expected to be realised in, or is intended for sale or consumption in, the
company's normal operating cycle. (b) If it is held primarily for the purpose of being traded.
(c) If it is expected to be realised within 12 months after the reporting date.
The process of conversion of cash into raw material, conversion of raw material
into finished goods, conversion of finished goods into debtor and finally conversion
of debtor into cash is called as operating cycle.
Assets other than current assets are classified as non-current assets.

(2) A liability shall be classified as current, if it satisfies any of the following criteria :
(a) If it is expected to be setteled in the company's normal operating cycle. (b) If it is
held primarily for the purpose of being traded. (c) If it is due to be settled within twelve

months after the reporting date. All other liabilities except current liabilities are classified
as non-current liabilities.

(3) A receivable shall be classified as a "Trade receivable" if it is in respect of the amount
due on account of goods sold or services rendered in the normal course of business.

(4) A payable shall be classified as a "Trade payable" if it is in respect of the amount due on
account of goods purchased or services received in normal course of business.

(5) A company shall disclose the following in the notes to accounts.

(1) Equity and liabilities :

(1) Shareholders’ funds :

(A) Share capital :
For each class of share capital (Different classes of preference shares to be treated

seperately.)

(a) the number and amount of shares authorised

(b) the number of shares issued, subscribed and fully paid and subscribed but not
fully paid

(c) Par value per share

 

119
Company Final Accounts
(d) a reconciliation of the number of shares outstanding at the beginning and at the
end of the reporting period

(e) the rights, preferences and restrictions attaching to each class of shares including
restrictions on the distribution of dividends and the repayment of capital

(f) shares in the company held by each shareholder holding more than 5 percent
shares specifying the number of shares held

(g) terms of any securities convertible into equity/preference shares issued along
with the earliest date of conversion in descending order starting from the farthest
such date

(h) calls unpaid
(i) forfeited shares (amount originally paid-up)
(B) Reserves and surplus
Reserves and surplus shall be classified as :
) Capital reserves
) Capital redemption reserves

(a

(b

(c) Securities premium reserve

(d) Debenture redemption reserve

(e) Revaluation reserve

(f) Share options outstanding account

(g) Other reserves like dividend equalisation reserve, investment reserve etc.

(h) Surplus i.e. balance in statement of profit and loss discolsing allocations and
appropriations such as dividend, bonus shares and transfer to/from reserves etc.

(ii) A reserve specifically represented by earmarked investments shall be termed as a
"fund".

(iii) Debit balance of statement of profit and loss shall be shown as a negative figure under
the head "surplus". Similarly, the balance of "Reserves and surplus", after adjusting
negative balance of surplus, if any, shall be shown under the head "Reserves and
surplus" even if the resulting figure is in the negative.

(C) Money received against share warrants :

(2) Share application money pending allotment :
(3) Non-current liabilities :
(a) Long-term borrowings :
(i) Long-term borrowings shall be classified as :
(a) Bond/debentures
(b) Term loans : (A) from banks (B) from other parties
(c) Deferred payment / liabilities
(d) Deposits
(e) Loans and advances from related parties
(f) Long term maturities of financial lease obligations
(g) Other loan and advances
(ii) Borrowings shall further be sub-classified as secured and unsecured.
(iii) Where loans and advances have been guaranteed by directors or others, the aggregate
amount of such loans under each head shall be disclosed.
(iv) Bonds/debentures along with the rate of interest and particulars of redemption or
conversion shall be stated in descending order of maturity.
(v) Terms of repayment of term loans
(vi) Particulars of default in repayment of loans and interest, as on the balance sheet date.

120

 

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
(4)

(m1)
(1)

(b)
(c)

(a)

Deferred tax liabilities :

Other long-term liabilities :

Other long-term liabilities shall be classified as :

(a) Trade payables

(b) Others like provident fund, pension fund, gratuity fund etc.
Long-term provisions :

Current liabilities :

(a)
(i)

(b)
(c)

(a)

Short-term borrowings :

Short-term borrowings shall be classified as :

(a) Loans repayable on demand
(A) from banks (B) from other parties

(b) Loans and advances from related parties

(c) Deposits

(d) Other loans and advances

Borrowings shall further be sub-classified as secured and unsecured. Nature of

security shall be specified seperately in each case.

Where loans have been guaranteed by directors or others, the aggregate amount of

such loans and advances.

Period and amount of default as on the balance sheet date in repayments of loans and

interest shall be specified seperately in each case.

Trade payables :

Other current liabilities :

Other current liabilities shall be classified as :

(a) Current maturities of long term debt

(b) Current maturities of finance lease obligations

(c) Interest accrued but not due on borrowings

(d) Interest accrued and due on borrowings

(e) Income received in advance

(f) Unpaid dividends

(g) Application money received for allotment of securities and due for refund and
interest accrued thereon.

(h) Unpaid matured deposits and interest accrued thereon.

(i) Unpaid matured debentures and interest accrued thereon.

(j) Other payables.

(k) Others like calls received in advance.

Short-term provisions :

Short-term provisions shall be classified as :

(a) Provision for employee benefit

(b) Other provisions like provision for tax, proposed dividend, provision for bad debt etc

Assets :
Non-current assets :

(a)
(i)

Fixed assets :
Tangible assets :
Tangible assets shall be classifed as :

(i) (a) Land (b) Building (c) Plant and equipments
(d) Furniture and fixtures (e) Vehicles (f) Office equipments
(g) Others

(ii) Lease hold assets

 

121
Company Final Accounts
(ii) Intangible assets :
Intangible assets shall be classified as :
(a) Goodwill
(b) Brand / Trademark
(c) Computer software
(d) Publishing rights
(e) Mining rights
(f) Copyrights and Patents
(g) Recipes, formulae and technical know-how
(h) Licenses and franchise
(i) Others
(iii) Capital work in process :
(iv) Intangible assets under development :
(b) Non-current investments :
Intangible assets shall be classified as :
) Investments in property
) Investments in equity instruments
) Investments in preference shares

) Investments in government and trust securities

(a.
(b
(c
(d
(e) Investments in debentures and bonds
(f) Investments in mutual funds
(g) Investments in partnership firms
(h) Other non-current investments
(c) Deferred tax assets (Net) :
(d) Long-term loans and advances :
(i) Long-term loans and advances shall be classified as :
(a) Capital advances
(b) Loans and advances to related parties
(c) Other loans and advances
(ii) The above loans and advances shall also be seperately sub-classified as :
(a) Secured
(b) Unsecured
(c) Doubtful
(e) Others non-current assets :
Other non-current assets shall be classified as :
(a) Long-term trade receivables
(b) Others

 

122
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
(2) Current assets :
(a) Current investments :
Current investments shall be classified as :
a) Investments in equity instruments
b) Investments in preference shares
c) Investments in government and trust securities
) Investments in debentures or bonds
e) Investments in mutual funds
f) Investments in partnership firms
g) Other investments e.g. short-term investments
(b) Inventories :
Inventories shall be classified as :
(a) Raw materials
(b) Work-in-progress
(c) Finished goods
(d) Stock-in-trade
(e) Stores and spares
(f) Loose tools
(g) Others e.g. goods in transit
(c) Trade receivables :
Trade receivables shall be classified as :
(a) Debtors
(b) Bills receivables
(d) Cash and cash equivalents :
Cash and cash equivalents shall be classified as :
(a) Balances with banks
(b) Cheques, drafts on hand
(c) Cash on hand
(d) Others
(e) Short-term loans and advances :
Loans and advances given for a period of less than 12 months shall be included in
short-term loans and advances.
(f) Other current assets :

Prepaid expenses, income due but not received, tax paid in advance, deferred revenue
expenditure or fictitious assets to be written off during 12 months after the date of
balance sheet. e.g. Debenture discount, Advertisement suspense account etc.

  

e Contingent liabi
Contingent liabilities shall be classified as :
(a) Claims against the company not acknowledged as debt

lies (To the extent not provided for)

(b) Guarantees given by the company
(c) Unpaid calls on shares purchased as investments
(d) Liabilities of incomplete contract

123

 

Company Final Accounts
Note : Money received against share warrant, share application money pending
allotment, deferred tax liability and deferred tax assets etc. are not expected to be asked in
the exam in the question of preparation of balance sheet. These balances are mentioned here as
they are given in the format of balance sheet as per schedule III of Companies Act, 2013.

7. Form of Profit and Loss Statement and General Instructions :

Part II of schedule III to the Companies Act, 2013 gives form of statement of profit and loss.
Profit and loss account of a company must be prepared as per this format. Schedule III gives only
vertical format. This form is as under :

Statement of Profit and Loss
Name of the Company .............sssscsesseseeessrseeeeeeeeesseee
Profit and Loss Statement for the Year Ended ............

 

Particulars Note Figures Figures
of of
No. current previous
year year

(2) (z)
(1) (2) (3) (4)

I Revenue from Operations (Sales)

II Other Income

III Total Revenue (I + II)

IV Expenses

 

 

 

Cost of material consumed

Purchase of stock-in-trade

Changes in inventories work-in-progress,
finished goods and stock-in-trade.

Employee benefit expense

Finance costs

Depreciation and amortisation expense

Other expenses
Total expenses

V_ Profit before exceptional and

extraordinary items and tax (III — IV)

 

VI Exceptional items

VII Profit before extraordinary items and
tax (V — VI)

VIII Extraordinary items

IX Profit before tax (VII — VIII)

X Tax expense :

 

(a) Current tax
(b) Deferred tax

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

124
Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
 

 

XI “Profit (loss) for the period from continuing

operations (IX — X)
XII Profit (loss) from discontinuing operations
XIII Tax expense of discontinuing operations
XIV Profit (loss) from discontinuing operations
XV _ Profit (loss) for the period (XI - XIV)
XVI Earning per equity share :

(a) Basic

(b) Diluted

 

 

 

 

 

e General Instructions for Preparation of Statement of Profit and Loss :

(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

This instructions shall apply to the income and expenditure account in the similar manner
as they apply to a statement of profit and loss.
(A) In respect of a company other than a finance company revenue from operations shall
disclose seperately in the notes revenue from :

(a) Sale of product

(b) Sale of services

(c) Other operating revenues

(B) In respect of finance company, revenue from operations shall include revenue from
(a) Interest and

(b) Other financial services
Finance Expenses :
Finance costs shall be classified as :
(a) Interest expense
(b) Other borrowing costs
(c) Applicable net gain/loss on foreign currency transactions and translation

Other Income :
Other income shall be classified as :

(a) Interest income

(b) Dividend income

(c) Net gain/loss on sale of investments

(d) Other non-operating income e.g. bad debt return
Employee Benefit Expenses :

Employee benefit expenses shall be classified as :
(a) Salary and wages

(b) Contribution to provident fund

(c) Expense on employee stock option scheme

(

d) Staff welfare expenses

 

125
Company Final Accounts
(6) Finance Cost :

Interest paid and outstanding interest on loan, debentures, public deposits, bonds and bank
overdraft shall be shown as finance cost.

(7) Depreciation and Amortisation Expenses :

Depreciation on fixed assets for current year, intangible assets written off, leasehold assets
written off and fictitious assets written off like research and developemnt expenses,
advertisement campaign expenses, debenture discount etc. shall be shown as depreciation and
amortisation expenses.

(8) Other Expenses :

Office and administrative expenses, selling and distribution expenses, audit fee, bad debt,
provision for bad debt for current year, loss on sale of assets, bank charges and commission
etc. shall be shown as other expenses.

Note : Exceptional items, extraordinary items, deferred tax, profit or loss of continuing
and discontinuing operations and earning per share is not expected in the question of
preparation of statement of profit and loss and hence these items will not be asked in
the examination. These items are shown here because they are given in schedule III of
Companies Act, 2013.

Balance sheet and statement of profit and loss as per schedule III of Companies Act,
2013 are given only for explanation. For the purpose of examinations, balance sheet and
statement of profit and loss and their subheads shown below are to be considered.

Balance Sheet

Name of Company
Balance sheet as at ............

 

 

 

 

Particulars Note As at .
No.
