
 

Select correct alternative for each question :
(1) Financial statements of a company includes ......... .
(a) statement of profit and loss and balance sheet

(b) cash flow statement and statement showing changes in equity

(c) notes to the accounts
(d) all of above

(2) It is compulsory to prepare statement of profit and loss and balance sheet in ....

as per schedule III of Companies Act, 2013.
(a)  horinzontal or T
b) vertical

(
(c) statement of profit and loss is horizontal and balance sheet vertical
(

d) statement of profit and loss is vertical and balance sheet horizontal

. form

 

(3) cesses is/are compulsory to prepare in specified form as per schedule II of Companies

Act, 2013.
(a) Balance sheet
b) Statement of profit and loss

(
(c) Balance sheet and statement of profit and loss both
(

d) Neither balance sheet nor statement of profit and loss

 

147

Company Final Accounts
(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

For... it is compulsory to prepare statement of profit and loss and balance sheet in
specified vertical form.

(a) sole proprietorship

(b) partnership

(c) all companies

(d) companies except insurance company, electricity company and banking company
Balance sheet is prepared .......... while statement of profit and loss is prepared .......... :
(a) for a particular accounting period, as at particular date

(b) as at particular date, for a particular accounting period

(c) as at particular date, as at particular date

(d) for a particular accounting period, for a particular accounting period

cesses shows financial position of a company while .........._ shows financial performance
of a company.

(a) Statement of profit and loss, cash flow statement

(b) Balance sheet, cash flow statement

(c) Statement of profit and loss, balance sheet

(d) Balance sheet, statement of profit and loss

Assets and liabilities of a company are classified into .......... and we. as per
Companies Act, 2013.

(a) current, fixed (b) _ fixed, fixed

(c) for short-term, for long-term (d) current, non-current

seseseaees assets is considered as current asset.

(a) Convertible into cash during 12 months after the date of balance sheet

(b) Realisable during 12 months after the date of balance sheet

(c) Consumable within 12 months after the date of balance sheet

(d) All of above

A machine to be sold during 12 months after the date of balance sheet is considered as
as per Companies Act, 2013.

 

(a) fixed asset (b) non-current asset

(c) current asset (d) expense

2. Answer in two or three sentences :

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)
(7)

What is financial statements ?

What is included in financial statements ?

State characteristics of financial statements.

State objectives of preparing financial statements.

State main headings of equity and liabilities side of balance sheet as per schedule-III of
Companies Act, 2013.

Show the classification of non-current liabilities.

Show the classification of current liabilities as per schedule-III of Companies Act, 2013.

 

148

Elements of Accounts : Part II : Std. 12
(8) What is current asset and non-current asset ?
(9) What is current liability and non-current liability ?

(10) Show the classification of current assets as per schedule-III of Companies Act, 2013.

 

 
