Dissolution of Partnership Firm

 

 

 

 

1. Introduction 4. Dissolution of Partnership Firm
2. Meaning of Dissolution 5. Accounting Treatment of Dissolution
3. Dissolution of Firm and Partnership — Exercise

1. Introduction

So far we have undertaken the study in context to continuation of business inspite of changes
in partnership due to the admission of a partner or retirement or death of a partner. This brings to the
end of a partnership, but it is not dissolution of a partnership firm.

The partnership firm and partnership automatically comes to an end when the current business is
closed and all partners get separated. We will study the transactions related to dissolution in this
chapter.

2. Meaning of Dissolution

Dissolution means end of existence. Here dissolution is to be studied in the context of dissolution of
partnership and a partnership firm, where two issues are considered for dissolution.

(i) Dissolution of a partnership firm

(ii) Dissolution of a partnership

When a partnership firm closes down its business on a permanent basis, (or a firm becomes
non-existent from legal point of view) it is known as dissolution of a partnership firm. In brief, when
a running firm is closed and its business activities are closed it is dissolution of a partnership firm.

When except one partner, all partners get separated from a firm, this is also an end of a
partnership. If this continuous one partner will become the owner of sole proprietor firm. In this case
also a partnership firm gets dissolved. When running business of the firm is sold to a joint stock
company - this is also dissolution of a partnership firm.

3. Dissolution of Firm and Partnership

It is essential to understand the meaning of firm dissolution and partnership dissolution, which is as
follows :

(A) Dissolution of Firm : As per section 39 of Indian Partnership Act when all partners get
separated through dissolution of firm, that brings end of their partnership - it is known as dissolution of
firm. In this manner when partnership is dissolved and close down the firm, it is dissolution of firm. The
business of the firm is closed down in these circumstances. As a result of dissolution, liabilities of the
firm are paid from the realisation of the sale of assets. From the remaining surplus capital of partners
is redeemed as per their contract.

When the entire business of the firm is sold, that is also dissolution of a partnership firm.

(B) Dissolution of Partnership : When business is not closed down due to retirement of
a partner, death of a partner, insolvency of a partner or due to any other reasons, and remaining

 

275
Dissolution of Partnership Firm
partners keep business continuous, it is a dissolution of old partnership. Except outgoing partners remaining
partners keep business continuous, consequently, new partnership takes place. Generally, the
proportion of partnership changes between continuing partners. In these circumstances partnership
firm does not get dissolved. But new partnership comes into existence due to reorganisation of

partnership.

Partnership is a relation of partners. While firm is a group name of all partners.

(C) Difference between dissolution of partnership and partnership firm :

 

Base

Dissolution of Partnership

Dissolution of Partnership Firm

 

Meaning

Reorganisation of partnership means
dissolution of partnership.

Permanent end of partnership firm is
dissolution of partnership firm.

 

Existence of
Firm

The existence of firm remains
continuous.

There is end of existence of the firm.

 

Books of
Accounts

Books of accounts remains continuous.

Books of accounts are closed.

 

Settlement of

No accounts are settled. But profit or

Accounts are settled. Through

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accounts loss arised due to revaluation is credited | realisation account disposal of assets
or debited respectively to partners’ is done and liabilities are paid. Surplus
capital accounts. Generally accounts amount is paid to partners for their
of outgoing partners are settled. final settlement.

Interference It is voluntary dissolution of partnership. | Whenever required court interferes.

of court No need of court's interference.

Effect There may not be dissolution of firm, There is automatic dissolution of
due to dissolution of partnership. partnership, when partnership firm is

dissolved.
4. Dissolution of Partnership Firm

In this chapter we will undertake study of important aspects of the dissolution of a partnership

firm. Subsequently we will undertake study of accounting treatments for the dissolution of a firm.

(A) Methods of dissolution of firm

(B) Legal and other provision for accounting settlement of dissolution

(C) Procedure of dissolution

(A) Methods of dissolution of firm :

As per Indian Partnership Act 1932 there are two methods for dissolution of partnership firm :

(1) Normal dissolution or dissolution without interference of court

(2) Dissolution by the court

(1) Normal dissolution or dissolution without interference of court : Through any of the

following methods partnership can be dissolved without the interference of court.

 

276

Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
(i) By agreement : When all partners agree to dissolve the firm, partnership firm can be
dissolved at any point of time. It is voluntary dissolution.
(ii) Dissolution as per contract : Dissolution of a partnership firm can be done on the basis of
predetermined contract between the partners.
(iii) Dissolution as per act : In the following conditions there is compulsory dissolution by the act.
(a) when all partners of the firm become insolvent; or except one, all partners become
insolvent.
(b) when business of firm becomes illegal, this also brings dissolution of a partnership firm.
(iv) Dissolution on happenings of certain contingencies :
(a) if constituted for a fixed term, by the expiry of that term.
(b) if constituted to carry out specific aim, by the completion thereof.
(v) Dissolution by notice : Where the partnership is at will, the firm may be dissolved by any
artner giving notice in writing to all the other partners of his intention to dissolve the firm. The firm is
Pi giving ig Pi

dissolved as from the date mentioned in the notice as the date of dissolution or if no date is so mentioned,
as from the date of the service of the notice.

(2) Dissolution by the court : When any partner file a suit for dissolution of a firm on any of
the following grounds and the court orders to dissolve the firm.
(i) When any partner becomes of unsound mind.
(ii) When a partner becomes permanently incapable of performing his duties as a partner.
(iii) When a partner undertakes misconduct against partnership firm or against business of firm.
(iv) When a partner willfully and persistently breaches the partnership agreement.
(v) When a partner transfers his whole interest in the partnership to a third party without
the consent of other partners.
(vi) When a firm continuously incurs losses and is unable to run a business due to loss.
(vii) When the court finds any other ground to be just and equitable for the dissolution of the firm.
(B) Legal and other provisions for accounting settlement of dissolution :
(1) For loss of a firm : As per Indian Partnership Act, the loss arised including capital deficit
at the time of dissolution is executed in the following manner :
(a) First of all to be written off from the profit of the firm.
(b) If profit is not sufficient, then it will be met from the capital of the partners.
(c) If capital is not sufficient, then all partners would distribute this loss in their profit-loss
sharing ratio and pay from their personal assets as per need.
(2) Liabilities of a firm and personal liabilities of partners : The liabilities of partners is

unlimited. Thus for dues towards third party partners are responsible individually and collectively. As
per legal provision, assets of the firm are used to discharge the liabilities of the firm and personal assets

of partners are used to discharge their personal liabilities.

Since the liability of the partners is unlimited, after making the payment of personal liability from
personal asset, surplus can be used to pay the liabilities of the firm.

(3) Partners’ loan to firm : At the time of dissolution, first of all the dissolution expenses and
then the liabilities of the firm are paid from the realisation of the assets of the firm. Than from surplus,
the loan of partners is redeemed. If after making the payment of firms' liabilities, the available surplus is
insufficient to return back loan of more than one partner and nothing can be recovered from partners,
in this case the loan of these partners is redeemed in their loan proportion.

277

 

Dissolution of Partnership Firm
(4) Loan of partners' wife : If wife of a partner has given a loan to the firm from her
personal fund, this loan will be treated as a liability towards the third party and will be redeemed
accordingly.

If loan is given from the personal fund of her husband, then it will be treated as a loan of a partner.

(5) Liability of partners : Liability of partners is unlimited. If a partner or partners becomes
insolvent, solvent partners are responsible to pay the dues of the firm from their personal property.

(6) Distribution of assets realisation of firm : The realisation of asset of the firm is paid in
the following order :

(a) First of all dissolution expense is paid.

(b) Next, liabilities towards third parties are paid.

(c) Next, loan of partners paid.

(d) Finally, capital and balances of current accounts of partners are redeemed.

(e) Even if any surplus remains after the payment shown in (d), surplus will be distributed

among all the partners in their profit-loss sharing ratio.

(C) General procedure of dissolution :

When a firm is dissolved, at that time all assets of the firm are sold and the payment is made in the
mentioned order. Due to the accounting treatments of dissolution, books of accounts of the firm will be
closed.

5. Accounting Treatments of Dissolution

At the time of dissolution of firm, all assets of firm are sold and liabilities are paid from the
realised income. If surplus remains, capital is redeemed. Books of accounts are closed. To incorporate
complete procedure the following accounting treatments are given.

(A) Preparation of necessary accounts : The following accounts are prepared to follow
the accounting procedure of dissolution and to give the accounting treatments.

(1) _ Realisation Account

(2) Partners Loan Account (if any)

(3) Partners Capital Accounts / Current Accounts

(4) Cash / Bank Account

(1) Realisation Account : An account which is prepared at the time of dissolution to give
the accounting treatments to dispose off assets and payment of liabilities, is known as ‘Realisation
Account’.

To close assets and liabilities excluding cash / bank account are transferred to realisation account
at their book value at the time of the dissolution of a firm.

Subsequently amount realised from the sale of assets is debited to cash account and credited to
the realisation account. Payment of liabilities is debited to realisation account and credited to cash account.

The difference of realisation account will be either profit or loss. This difference is allocated
between the partners in their profit sharing ratio. Profit is credited to their capital account. Loss is

debited to their capital account.
To incorporate above mentioned dissolution related accounting treatments, realisation account is
prepared. The profit or Loss of the realisation account is allocated between the partners therefor it is type of

Nominal A/C. (The specimen of realisation account is given subsequently.)
278

 

Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
(2) Partners' Loan Account : Many times for financial assistance purpose partners provide
loan to the business. At the time of dissolution of a firm, partners' loan are repaid prior to the redemption
of the capital of partners. Thus at the time of dissolution partners' loan accounts are also prepared. (when
loan is provided by the partners.)

(3) Partners’ Capital Accounts / Current Accounts : Earlier detailed study of partners’ capital
accounts / current accounts is undertaken. At the time of dissolution, parnters' capital is redeemed after
the payment of all the liabilities.

(4) Cash / Bank Account : Since firm is dissolved, all transactions are done in cash form or
through bank. Cash account is not transferred at the realisation account. All cash receipts and payments
are recorded in this account. At last, surplus is paid to the partners.

Journal entries for the preparation of Dissolution Accounts :

(A) Before recording journal entries prepare above stated necessary accounts

(B) Disclose balances in partners' capital accounts and cash / bank account

(C) Disclose balances in partners' loan acconts (if any)

(1) Balances of accumulated reserve and undistributed profit :

First of all balances of accumulated reserves are the shown in the balance sheet of the firm, like
general reserve, workmen compensation fund, credit balance of profit and loss account, debit balance of
profit and loss account etc. These amounts are not transferred to the realisation account. These amounts
are transferred to the partners capital account in their profit-sharing ratio. These accounts are not
either assets or liabilities, but component of capital, hence it is transferred to the capital account. Journal
entry for this is as follows :

(i) Reserves and credit balance of profit and loss account (profit) :

 

 

Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (%) | Credit (2)
Reserves A/c Dr v
Investment fluctuation fund A/c Dr v
Workmen accident compensation fund A/c Dr v
Profit and loss A/c (Profit) Dr v
To Partners’ capital A/c v

[Being reserves and undistributed profit credited
to partners’ capital account in their profit and

loss sharing ratio. ]

 

(ii) Debit balance of profit and loss account (loss ) :

 

 

Date Particulars LF. Debit (%) | Credit (2)
Partners’ capital A/c Dr v
To Profit and Loss A/c (loss) v

[Being debit balance of profit and loss A/c (loss)
debited to capital account of partners in their

profit and loss sharing ratio. |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

279
Dissolution of Partnership Firm
(2) When assets are closed and transferred to the realisation account :

Assets always disclose debit balance. At the time of dissolution of a firm, except cash/bank account
all assets accounts disclosed in balance sheet are transferred to the debit side of realisation account at their
book value. To close assets account, their accounts are credited. e.g. Land-building, plant-machinery,
furniture, investments, debtors, goodwill, patent, trademark, copyright, bills receivable etc. where journal
entry will be as follows :

 

Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (%) | Credit (2)

 

Realisation A/c Dr v
To Land-building A/c
To Plant-machinery A/c
To Furniture A/c
To Investments A/c
To Debtors A/c
To Bills receivable A/c
To Other assets A/c

[Being assets accounts are closed and
transferred to realisation account at their book

QVQNNNNNN

value. |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Note : On the date of dissolution, balance of cash or bank account disclosed in the balance
sheet is not transferred to the realisation account. It's separate account is prepared and same balance is

disclosed. Because realisation from sale of assets and payment of liabilities are shown in the cash

account. At last, surplus is transferred to the capital account of partners.

(3A) When accounts of provisions are closed and transferred to the realisation account :

Provisions always disclose credit balance. At the time of dissolution of a firm all provisions
account disclosed in balance sheet are transferred to the credit side of realisation account at their
book value. To close provision accounts, their accounts are debited. e.g. bad debt reserve, depreciation

fund account, discount reserve on debtors or bills receivable account etc.

 

 

Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (%) | Credit (2)
Bad debt reserve A/c Dr v
Depreciation fund A/c Dr v
Discount reserve on debtors and bills
receivable A/c Dr v
To Realisation A/c v
[Being provisions accounts are closed and
transferred to realisation account. ]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3B) When liabilities accounts are closed and transferred to the realisation account :

Liabilities always disclose credit balance. At the time of dissolution of a firm liabilities accounts

disclosed in balance sheet are transferred to the credit side of the realisation account at their book value.

 

280
Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
To close liabilities accounts their accounts are debited. e.g. creditors, bills payable, bank overdraft,

providend fund, workmen profit sharing fund, outstanding expenses etc. Journal entry will be as follows :

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Date Particulars LF. Debit (%) | Credit (=)

Creditors A/c Dr v

Bills payable A/c Dr v

Bank overdraft A/c Dr v

Workmen profit sharing fund A/c Dr v

Outstanding expenses A/c Dr v

To Realisation A/c v

[Being liabilities accounts are closed and

transferred to realisation account. ]

 

 

Note : Since the settlement of partners' accounts is to be done, capital accounts of partners,
current accounts of parnters, loan accounts of partners are not transferred to the realisation account.
Their accounts are separately opened and balances are shown there in. At last these accounts are
closed in dissolution.

(4) When assets are sold :
(A) Sale of assets : In this case assets are sold in open market. The realisation of sale of

assets is debited to the cash/bank account and realisation account is credited.

 

Date Particulars LF. Debit (%) | Credit (=)

 

Cash/Bank A/c Dr v
To Realisation A/c v
[Being sale of assets is credited to realisation

account. |

 

(B) When assets taken over by a partner : When any asset is taken over by a partner at that

time partners' account is debited and realisation account is credited.

 

 

Date Particulars LF. Debit (%) | Credit (=)
Respective Partners’ capital A/c Dr v
To Realisation A/c v

[Being assets taken over by partner is debited to

his account and credited to realisation account. |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Note : (1) The realisable value must be given of all the tangible and intangible assets at the time
of dissolution of a firm. It must be indicated in question if there is no realisable value of any tangible
and intangible assets.

(2) When assets recorded in the books are given to the creditors recorded in the books for their
dues : This kind of asset and creditor are already transferred in the realisation account. Thus the
realisable value of asset and payable amount to creditor will not be recorded.

281

 

Dissolution of Partnership Firm
(C) When income is received from unrecorded asset :

 

Date Particulars

LF.

Debit (%)

Credit (=)

 

Cash A/c
To Realisation A/c

[Being amount realised on unrecorded

 

 

assets. |

 

v

 

 

 

 

(5) When liabilities are paid :

(A) Paid in cash : When liabilities of the firm are paid in cash, realisation account is debited and

cash/bank account is credited.

 

Date Particulars

LF.

Debit (%)

Credit (=)

 

Realisation A/c
To Cash / Bank A/c
[Being all liabilities are paid. ]

 

 

Dr

 

v

 

 

 

 

partners’ capital is credited.

(B) When liabilities payment is accepted by a partner :

Whe:

n any partner p

or accepts to pay the liability of the firm, in this case realisation account is debited

ays the liability

and respective

 

Date Particulars

LF.

Debit (%)

Credit (=)

 

Realisation A/c

[Being partner has accepted liabilitiy for
payment. ]

 

 

Dr

To Respective partners' capital A/c

 

v

 

 

 

 

Note : When no information is given about the payment of liability at the time of dissolution it

will be assumed that the liability is paid as per the book value.

(C) When unrecorded liability is paid :

 

 

 

 

 

Date Particulars L.F. | Debit (%) | Credit (2)
Realisation A/c Dr v
To Cash / Bank A/c v
[Being unrecorded liability is paid.]

 

 

 

 

(6) When dissolution expense of partnership firm is paid :

Generally, dissolution expense of partnership firm is borne by the firm itself. The accounting

treatment of dissolution expense for different situations can be given as follows :

 

282
Elements of Accounts : Part I : Std. 12
(A) When dissolution expense is paid by a firm and to be borne by the firm :

 

 

 

 

 

 

Date Particulars LF. Debit (%) | Credit (=)
Realisation A/c Dr v
To Cash / Bank A/c v
[Being dissolution expense is paid. ]

 

 

 

(B) When any partner accepts liability :

(i) No accounting treatment is given, if the dissolution expense is to be borne and paid by any

partner :

But, when any remuneration is payable to the respective partner to perform the responsibility of

dissolution procedure, the following entry will be passed.

 

Date

Particulars

LF.

Debit (%)

Credit (2)

