EXERCISE

 

Select appropriate alternative for each question :

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Balance of general reserve and credit balance of profit and loss account is transferred to

seesseenees account at the time of the admission of a new partner.

) capital account of newly admitted partner

(b) all partners' capital accounts including new partner

) old partners’ capital accounts

(d) revaluation account

Goodwill appearing in the books of the firm at the time of admission of the new partner is

recorded a8... :

(a) debited to old partners' capital accounts in their old profit-loss sharing ratio and
goodwill account is credited

credited to a artners' capital accounts including new partner in their new
(b) dited Mp: " capital including Pp in theii
profit-loss sharing ratio and goodwill account is debited.

(c) admitted partners’ capital A/e Cr, Goodwill A/c Dr

(d) credited to old partners' capital accounts in their old profit-loss sharing ratio and
goodwill account debited.

Premium for goodwill brought by the partner is recorded on .............. side.

(a) debit side of old partners' capital accounts in old profit-loss sharing ratio.

(b) credit side of old partners’ capital accounts in their old profit-loss sharing ratio

(c) debit side of old partners’ capital accounts in their sacrificing ratio

(d) credit side of old partners' capital accounts in their sacrificing ratio

Revaluation account is . type of account.

 

 

(a) personal (b) nominal

(c) real (d) temporary

When new partner brings his share of goodwill in cash, .. . account is credited.
(a) cash (b) premium for goodwill

(c) — goodwill (d) his capital account

As per accounting standard-26 ............ goodwill can not be shown in the books.

(a) goodwill for which some amount is paid for consideration
(b) internally generated

(c) (a) and (b) both

(d) neither of (a) and (b)

 

203

Admission of a Partner
(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Revaluation account is also known as ..........+ :

(a) _ profit-loss account (b) profit and loss adjustment account

(c) profit and loss appropriation account (d) profit and loss suspense account

When only old profit-loss sharing ratio is given; sacrificing ratio of old partners =............ :
(a) equal (b) old ratio

(c) old share — new share (d) can not be calculated

Old partner is also required to give his share in goodwill to other old partner, when ..

 

(a) his capital is less
(b) his new share in new profit-loss ratio is more than his old share
(c) his new share in new profit-loss ratio is less than his old share

(d) his new share in new profit-loss ratio is equal to old share

 

Profit or loss of revaluation account is transferred to .............. account in .. Tatio.
(a) old partners, equal (b) all partners, new profit-loss sharing ratio
(c) old partners, sacrificing ratio (d) old partners, old ratio

2. Answer following questions in one sentence :

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

(9)
(10)

How is a new partner admitted in a firm ?

For what purpose a new partner is admitted in a firm ?

State necessary accounting adjustments at the time of the admission of a new partner.
State rights of a new partner.

Why assets and liabilities are revalued at the time of the admission of a new partner ?
Why a new partner is required to give his share in goodwill ?

What is sacrificing ratio ? How it is calculated ?

Explain with reasons the accounting treatment of reserves and accumulated profit and loss
appearing in the books of the firm at the time of the admission of a new partner.

When revaluation account is debited and credited ?
